{{knowledge objective
|Identifiant=OIC-006-08-A
|Item_parent=The organisation of clinical practice and the methods used to secure the patient's care pathway
|Item_parent_short=The organisation of clinical practice and the methods used to ensure a safe patient pathway
|Rank=A
|Title=Knowing the organisation of emergencies (SAMU, SMUR, emergency and specialised structures) and the management of an emergency call.
|Description=None
|Rubric=Taking charge
|Contributors=
|Order=8}}
Emergency medical structures include the ''Samu-Centre 15'', the ''mobile emergency and resuscitation services (Smur)'' and the ''emergency services or emergency structures (SU)''.


The Samu-Centre 15 is a hospital service whose mission is to respond to emergency situations:

- provides a "permanent medical listening service", 24 hours a day, 7 days a week,

- determines and triggers the "most appropriate response" to the call in the shortest possible time

- ensures the availability of public or private hospital facilities appropriate to the patient's condition,

- if necessary, organises the patient's "transport" and "hospital reception".

In addition, the Samu :

- participates in drawing up emergency plans and dealing with exceptional health situations,

- contributes to the initial and ongoing training of healthcare professionals within the emergency care teaching centres (CESU). The Samu has had a call reception and regulation centre (CRRA) with a single national call number since 1978, "15", to provide permanent medical assistance. This is known as the Samu-Centre 15.


'''Emergency call management:''' The call is initially taken by a '''medical regulation assistant''' (ARM) responsible for identifying the location of the distress, the caller and the nature of the call. The call is then handled by a "medical regulator (MR)" who, while questioning the caller and, if possible, the patient himself, will determine the "need for care and commit the necessary resources": this is "act I" of medical regulation, a telemedicine act recognised by the regulations and the professional orders. The commitment of resources can be made during the dialogue with the caller, as the medical questioning does not delay the intervention of a team, which is activated while the discussion continues. The emergency medical technician also has an "advisory role", advising a witness or the patient him/herself on the actions to be taken before the arrival of first aid and/or medical resources: this assistance with actions over the telephone, in which MRAs and emergency medical technicians are trained, is particularly important in the event of a cardiac arrest, for example. The rest of the intervention ("act II" of medical regulation) is carried out by the MRAs and the RSMs in order to organise the follow-up to the call and, if necessary, the transport and admission of the patient to a care facility. At this stage, the RSO will be able to advise the teams on site and, above all, direct the patient to the right care.

'''Link to item 17''' Telemedicine, telehealth and telehealth services.


'''Les Services Mobiles d'Urgence et de Réanimation (SMUR)''': The mission of the SMUR, triggered by the Samu-Centre 15, is to '''take charge, on the spot, outside the hospital'', of medical distress and provide emergency care before and during transport of the patient to the appropriate establishment, designated by the Samu. SMURs may specialise in transporting children (SMUR Pédiatriques).


Structures des urgences (SU)'' : A hospital service, the SU is responsible for ''dealing with unscheduled admissions'' to a public or private health establishment, 24 hours a day, every day of the year, of any unselected person presenting in an emergency situation, including psychiatric emergencies''. Emergency Departments are an essential point of entry into the healthcare system. Reception is formalised around the ''reception organising nurse'' (IOA). The ED is generally organised into care pathways, often with specific premises and staff. The life-saving emergency room deals with serious patients. This is a standard feature of an ED, as is a paediatric care unit. There is usually also a "short" rapid care pathway and a "long" pathway (patients requiring several additional examinations and hospitalisation).