{{knowledge objective
|Identifiant=OIC-010-01-A
|Item_parent=Transversal approaches to the body
|Item_parent_short=Cross-sectional approaches to the body
|Rank=A
|Title=Knowing the main human dimensions of the body (nutrition, physical activity, gender, procreation, aesthetic standards)
|Description= Historical, social, cultural and normative contextualisation of representations of the body and its uses.  Socially topical issues: sexuality, gender identity, filiation and parenthood.
|Rubric=Definition
|Contributors=Solène Lellinger,Roberto Poma
|Order=1}}
The body is a multidimensional object of study. This is why the humanities and social sciences have explored the human body in so many different ways. Whether approached through the prism of history, sociology, anthropology, philosophy or literature, the body offers an abundance of possible approaches to its study.

Representations of what a healthy body looks like change with the times.

The choice of foods suited to human beings, the way we eat, physical exercise, gender assignment, the regulation of procreation and aesthetic standards are all social constructions that adapt to the constraints imposed by cultural traditions and the natural environment. The act of eating helps to reconstruct social logics and group identities. The presence of dietary prohibitions in several religious traditions, health regimes linked to different stages of life, particularly childhood and old age ('ageing well'), the impact of certain foods on the emotional and affective sphere, and the importance of gastronomy in the social interactions of certain groups, all place human food at the heart of a social, symbolic and economic system with implications for representations of the body in a given place and time. For example, overweight, which in the Renaissance was synonymous with good health, gradually became a major public health problem from the 1960s-1970s onwards. This change began in the 16th century with the evolution of beauty codes, illustrated by clothing habits such as corseting. So there are close links between aesthetics, the standards imposed by fashion and body standards. But this is also linked to the industrialisation and urbanisation of society, imposing a more sedentary lifestyle and leading to new consumer habits and a richer diet.

For sociologists, notably Pierre Bourdieu, the body performs at least three functions: that of memory, that of learning class habits and that of a marker of social position. The body thus appears to bear witness to inequalities between social classes, depending on eating habits or the type of work performed, which do not shape bodies in the same way.

In addition to social differences, there are also cultural differences. Voluntary transformations of the body, such as tattoos, piercings and scarification, have different functions in different eras and societies. There are also differences in the production of bodily norms and rules depending on the religion.

Addressing the question of the body is intrinsically linked to the question of identity and in particular the construction of sexual identity. Becoming a man or a woman is thus also considered from the angle of the construction of social gender and not just that of biological differentiation (see item 58).