{{knowledge objective
|Identifiant=OIC-010-03-B
|Item_parent=Transversal approaches to the body
|Item_parent_short=Cross-sectional approaches to the body
|Rank=B
|Title=Knowing the place of the body in clinical practice (personal data, the medical gaze, palpation, imaging, biological analyses, etc.)
|Description=Distinguish between and articulate the body experienced by the subject (subjective) and the body objectified by medicine and medical language.
|Rubric=Management
|Contributors=Solène Lellinger,Roberto Poma
|Order=3}}

Since the development of medical techniques, the bodily signs of illness are no longer observed only by the eye of the carer, but also and above all by a whole range of technical devices: thermometers, stethoscopes, medical imaging, biological analyses, etc. These have redefined the way in which illnesses are seen and conceived, but also the way in which bodies are apprehended. These have redefined the way in which we see and conceive of illnesses, but also the way in which we apprehend our bodies. As an artefact between carer and patient, between observer and observed, they redefine the boundaries between the inside and outside of the body, and transform the materiality of the body into a set of variables, images and data that can be reductionist.

The resulting observation is accompanied by its own terminology, which can also lead to distancing and create a gap between what is experienced by the patient (their subjective experience) and the way in which medicine objectifies their body.

When it comes to the human body, the human sciences most often distinguish between a body-object and a body-subject. The first is simply a body among bodies, impersonal, governed by natural laws, devoid of specifically human characteristics, an object of action or contemplation. The second, the subject-body, designates both the subjective body, as the psychophysiological substratum of the individual experience of the body, and the subject's body, as the dimension of corporeity on which the action of the human subject is exercised. In the world of healthcare, this distinction makes it possible to relativise and clarify knowledge about the body, whether healthy or ill, without falling into the easy reductionism that would consist of directing the carer's attention to a single aspect of physicality. The body cannot be reduced to a battery of organs, or to a set of figures or laboratory images, or to the patient's account of his or her own life.