{{knowledge objective
|Identifiant=OIC-129-21-B
|Item_parent=Arthrosis
|Item_parent_short=Arthrosis
|Rank=B
|Title=Knowing the principles of the treatment of coxarthrosis, gonarthrosis and osteoarthritis of the fingers
|Description=Know the principles of pharmacological and non-pharmacological medical treatment for each arthritic site.
|Rubric=Management
|Contributors=
|Order=21}}
Treatment is multidisciplinary.

It includes the ''announcement of a chronic illness''.

It systematically combines pharmacological and non-pharmacological treatment and aims to control pain and limit its functional impact.

Medical treatment will take into account the number of symptomatic arthritic joints (isolated gonarthrosis encouraging local treatments versus polyarthrosis encouraging systemic treatments) as well as the presence of co-morbidities which may limit certain drug prescriptions (e.g. oral NSAIDs).

Non-pharmacological measures include :

- Patient education with :

o Explanations of the disease, its course and treatment

o Measures to protect the joints by prescribing simple equipment: a cane for osteoarthritis of the lower limbs or an orthosis, for example.

o Self-exercise programmes and promotion of physical activity

o Weight loss if overweight or obese and prevention of overweight and obesity

- Prescription of rehabilitation adapted to the location, with muscle strengthening, combating stiffness by working on joint amplitude, learning self-exercise, etc.

- Adapted physical activity

- Spa treatment, particularly for polyarthritis

Pharmacological measures are intended to provide analgesia rather than structural relief, and are prescribed following an assessment of pain and functional discomfort.

- Per os

o Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) can be prescribed: the most effective oral treatment for osteoarthritis, but beware of gastric, cardiac and renal side-effects in particular. Always combine with PPI after the age of 65. Lowest effective dose, shortest duration. Contraindicated if history of heart disease, stroke or osteoarthritis.

o A simple level I analgesic may be prescribed on request, depending on the pain, rather than as a routine treatment (paracetamol up to 3g per day).

o Prescription of level 2 analgesics should be limited because of the side-effects, level 3 in exceptional cases.

o Slow-acting anti-arthritics (chondroitin, glucosamine) sometimes used for osteoarthritis of the hands and knees. No longer reimbursed.

- Topicals :

o Topical NSAIDs preferable for digital osteoarthritis, possible for gonarthrosis.

- Intra-articular

o Cortisone derivatives :

ยง Knee

ยง Possible on the hip under imaging control (X-ray or ultrasound), and on the fingers in the event of intractable pain.

o Hyaluronic acid :

ยง No longer reimbursed, but effective and used in femorotibial gonarthrosis.

Regular follow-up with reassessment of the efficacy and tolerability of treatments as part of chronic pain management (ineffective or poorly tolerated treatments should not be continued).

If medical treatment fails and pain is present with a significant impact on quality of life, an indication for surgery will be discussed. Depending on the location, the patient may be offered:

- Total hip replacement for coxarthrosis

- Placement of a total prosthesis or a unicompartmental prosthesis for gonarthrosis

- Trapezectomy or trapeziometacarpal prosthesis in the case of rhizarthrosis