{{knowledge objective
|Identifiant=OIC-355-03-A
|Item_parent=Digestive haemorrhage
|Item_parent_short=Digestive haemorrhage
|Rank=A
|Heading=Know the modes of clinical revelation (haematemesis, melena, haematochezia, haemorrhagic shock)
|Description=None
|Rubric=Positive diagnosis
|Contributors=
|Order=3}}
A) Obvious digestive haemorrhage: in these situations, the patient describes the release of blood:

     1) Haematemesis: production of blood in the mouth during an effort to vomit. Haematemesis indicates bleeding above the angle of Treitz: haematemesis is always of high origin.

           2) Melena: digested, black, foul-smelling (tar-like) blood emerges from the anus. Bleeding generally occurs upstream of the right colonic angle. In 80% of cases, melena is of upper origin! The blood has gone down the intestine and is digested.

           3) Haematochezia: emission of red blood from the anus mixed with faeces.

           4) Recterrhagia: emission of red blood from the anus, not mixed with stools. There are two types of rectal discharge, which are completely different from a diagnostic and therapeutic point of view:

- Rectal bleeding without a drop in haemoglobin level: the most common type of rectal bleeding, mostly of anorectal origin. This is not usually an emergency, unless the bleeding is continuous.

- Chest pain with reduced haemoglobin levels :

o Upper digestive haemorrhage with shock: the flow of bleeding is so great that the blood rushes down the intestine without having time to be digested in melena. This is always an emergency.

o Lower digestive haemorrhage, usually without shock


B) Iron deficiency anaemia

Iron deficiency anaemia may reveal sub-clinical digestive haemorrhage (the patient does not describe bleeding). In the absence of pathological gynaecological bleeding, a digestive cause should be sought.


C) Hypovolaemic shock without clinical signs :

This rare situation involves a patient in a state of hypovolaemic shock without any blood coming out. Blood is sought by rectal examination and insertion of a gastric tube.


D) Differential diagnoses of upper gastrointestinal haemorrhage :

 ''With production to the mouth of blood:
''
- Production of blood when coughing: haemoptysis

- Posterior swallowed epistaxis

- Abundant swallowed gingival bleeding

 ''With production in the mouth of blackish-red compounds reminiscent of blood:''

- Vomiting of wine, beetroot, stasis fluid or other liquids.


E) Differential diagnosis of lower GI haemorrhage

 In women, bleeding of gynaecological origin

 ''With production in the anus of blackish-red compounds reminiscent of blood'': charcoal and iron per os cause a black discolouration of the stools which may be confused with melena but can be distinguished from it by the absence of a characteristic odour. Beetroot turns the stools red.