{{knowledge objective
|Identifiant=OIC-186-13-B
|Item_parent=Hypersensitivities and allergies in children and adults: physiopathological, epidemiological and diagnostic aspects and principles of treatment
|Item_parent_short=Hypersensitivity and allergy in children and adults: pathophysiological, epidemiological and diagnostic aspects and principles of treatment
|Rank=B
|Title=Know how to perform and prescribe skin tests in allergology
|Description=None
|Rubric=Management
|Contributors=
|Order=13}}
Skin tests investigate immediate allergic reactions (type I, IgE) and delayed reactions (type IV, T lymphocytes).

Skin test readings are therefore either immediate (15 minutes) or delayed (48 hours).


1) ''Pricks'' explore ''immediate reactions'' and are performed on the front of the forearm. A drop of the diluted allergen to be tested is placed on an area of healthy skin. A small quantity of the allergen is then introduced into the epidermis by "pricking through the drop" (with a microlance or needle). A ''positive control'' (a drop of histamine) and a ''negative control'' (a drop of saline) are also taken. The "15-minute reading" is taken.

The allergen test is "positive" if an "urticarial" lesion appears as a result of the activation of mast cells carrying specific IgE antibodies to the allergen tested. The diameter of the urticarial papule must be at least 3 mm greater than the papule in the prick test carried out with the negative control (more often than not, the negative control does not produce a papule and is therefore "perfectly negative").

There are "two conditions for declaring a prick test with the allergen to be negative": 1) no papule on the test itself, 2) urticarial papule obtained on the histamine prick test (if there is no urticaria on the histamine test, the skin is not reacting overall and the negative test with the allergen is therefore uninterpretable).

Rare and usually mild side-effects of prick test: widespread local reaction, generalised urticaria, syndromic reaction (rhinitis, asthma). Exceptional anaphylactic reactions


2) ''Patch tests'' explore ''delayed reactions'' and are usually performed on the patient's back, also on healthy skin. The allergen to be tested is placed in a small occlusive cup which is left in place for 48 hours. The cup is then removed and the test interpreted. The patch is considered positive if the area tested has an "eczema-like" appearance, indicating a local reaction of the delayed hypersensitivity type (see Lisa item 187: Eczema).


Rare and usually benign side-effects of the patch: eczema extending beyond the patch area or even spread of eczema to other areas (exceptional).


3) ''Intra dermo-reaction'' (IDR) consists of injecting the allergen intradermally and carrying out either an immediate reading at 15 minutes (investigation of type I HS with deep urticaria associating local oedema, erythema and pruritus), or a delayed reading (investigation of type IV HS with infiltrated and often pruritic erythema at 48 hours).


Rare and usually benign side-effects of TST: those of pricks and patches, depending on the type of reaction investigated.

Very rare cases of anaphylaxis during DSTs (mainly during hymenoptera venom tests and sometimes drug tests).