{{knowledge objective
|Identifiant=OIC-005-01-A
|Item_parent=Medical criminal, civil, administrative and disciplinary liability. The management of errors and complaints; therapeutic hazards
|Item_parent_short=Penal, civil, administrative and disciplinary medical liability. The management of errors and complaints; the therapeutic hazard
|Rank=A
|Title=Knowing the definition of liability, penalties and compensation
|Description=None
|Rubric=Definition
|Contributors=Bastien Boussat
|Order=1}}

The liability of a healthcare professional or institution may be sought for two purposes: either to penalise the professional or institution, or to compensate a user who has suffered the consequences of an adverse event associated with healthcare. The penalty may be criminal or disciplinary in nature. Compensation is the responsibility of the person responsible (self-employed) or their employer if they are employed (public or private). It may also be obtained through an amicable procedure before the conciliation and compensation commissions. Compensation for victims is ensured by the obligation for doctors and health establishments (public or private) to take out professional indemnity insurance. In addition to providing compensation for victims, this insurance covers salaried doctors when the fault is detachable from the service or when the mission entrusted to them is exceeded.

In order to receive compensation for the harmful consequences of a medical act, a user must prove that the act caused the damage, that it gave rise to liability and that there was a causal link between the act and the damage.

In terms of the liability of healthcare professionals and establishments, damage can take several forms. It may be :

- physical or mental injury;

- loss of chance of survival or recovery;

- a loss of opportunity to have escaped a risk that ultimately materialised (in the case of failure to provide information).

The damage must be present and certain. It may be future if it is certain (for example, the sterility of a child as a result of faulty irradiation).

The causal link between the event giving rise to liability (generally fault) and the damage must be certain. It need not be direct or exclusive.

Of the three elements of liability, causation is usually the most difficult for patients to prove. It is often difficult to distinguish the consequences of the fault from those of the spontaneous evolution of the pathological state of health. The courts accept that compensation may be awarded for loss of chance of survival or recovery. In this case, compensation is awarded in proportion to the probability of survival or recovery lost as a result of the fault.

The same reasoning applies in the case of a failure to provide information. In this case, the patient has lost a chance to escape the risk that ultimately materialised. In other words, if they had been informed of the risk, they could have chosen to run it or to forego the medical procedure. Compensation is awarded in proportion to the probability that the patient would have had of foregoing the procedure if he had been informed of the risk. As a result, if the procedure was essential, the judge concludes that even if the patient had been informed of the risk, he would not have decided to undergo the procedure. The loss of chance is therefore zero.

The courts and the administrative courts also accept that a failure to provide information gives rise to a right to compensation for loss of preparation, as distinct from loss of opportunity. When the risk of which the patient was unaware actually materialises, this compensation compensates the patient for any inconvenience he or she may have suffered as a result of not being able to prepare for this eventuality, in particular by making certain personal arrangements.