{{knowledge objective
|Identifiant=OIC-003-18-A
|Item_parent=Reasoning and decision-making in medicine. Evidence-based medicine (EBM). Shared medical decision-making. Controversy
|Item_parent_short=Reasoning and decision-making in medicine. Evidence-based medicine (EBM). Shared medical decision-making. The controversy
|Rank=A
|Title=Knowing Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) and Clinical Decision Support
|Description=Fundamental concepts, knowing that data structures, algorithms and programming rules influence the design of systems, clinical decision support processes and diagnostic and therapeutic strategies.
|Rubric=Evaluation
|Contributors=Jacques Bouaud,Brigitte Seroussi
|Order=18}}

    Fundamental concepts, knowledge that data structure, algorithms and programming rules influence system design, clinical decision support processes and diagnostic and therapeutic strategies

'''Modelling and computerisation of decision-making'''. The decision-making process is designed to meet a given objective, for a given task. It can be broken down into four stages: (i) characterisation of a clinical situation, i.e. the supply of all the input decision-making parameters, (ii) choice of the model or knowledge to be mobilised to achieve the given objective on the basis of the input parameters, (iii) exploitation of the model and production of the processing result in the form of one or more output parameters which may correspond to possible alternatives, (iv) selection of the most appropriate alternative. In the case of decision "support" systems, rather than "decision-making" systems, the fourth stage is left to the discretion of the healthcare professionals using the medical decision support system (MDSS), which simply proposes the possible alternatives.

'''''Characterisation of a clinical situation'''''

To enable a SADM to be implemented, a clinical situation is formally represented by a set of criteria or decision variables, i.e. data.  To be usable, the information must be coded. The coding can be numerical, e.g. age, total cholesterol, etc., or Boolean. It can be Boolean, i.e. true or false, such as being menopausal. Finally, it can be categorical, such as blood type. In addition to coding, the data must be structured and organised, i.e. classified under different headings in order, for example, to distinguish between the current problem, personal history and family history. Similarly, current treatment must be distinguished from past treatment. Each item of data must be dated so that it can be correctly identified and used only if it makes sense, i.e. if it can be considered as still being valid.

There are several methods for obtaining data to be supplied as input to a SADM. The first is to enter the data "manually", i.e. the data is entered by the user (not recommended because of the risk of input errors). The second is to obtain the information directly in a digital format, as in the case of digitised images, digital signals and all measurements taken by electronic devices. For example, a connected scale can automatically transmit the patient's weight. Finally, another method is to re-use existing data, e.g. data stored in electronic patient records or in the hospital information system, to avoid double entry. While data coding allows it to be processed by information systems, there is no guarantee that it can be shared with other IT solutions. In fact, if you want to exchange and share data between different information systems, you need to ensure that these different systems can communicate with each other and 'understand' each other, in other words, that they are interoperable.

'''''Treatment models for a clinical situation'''''

Medical decision support systems (MDSS) are IT tools that use algorithms to automatically analyse a patient's characteristics in order to produce personalised proposals for prevention, diagnosis, treatment or follow-up. These artificial intelligence (AI) algorithms use logical-symbolic approaches that use knowledge and reproduce the reasoning of the human expert involved in the decision-making process (inferences), or numerical approaches based on learning from data.

# ''Knowledge-based decision support: reasoning for decisions

This type of approach was the basis for the construction of the first expert systems in medicine in the 1970s. The organisation of these systems is based on the articulation of three components: (i) the knowledge base, which is a formalised representation of the knowledge to be mobilised for decision support, (ii) the fact base, which defines the clinical case for which the decision must be constructed, and (iii) the inference engine, which implements logical reasoning to articulate the knowledge to resolve the clinical case.

There are various ways of representing knowledge, including IF-THEN production rules with or without a confidence coefficient, for example "IF headache and stiff neck and nausea/vomiting THEN meningeal syndrome", decision trees and semantic networks. Knowledge can be organised into state maps linked by transition operators (EON model), or into processes (GLIF model).

Inference engines rely on three types of inference: (i) deduction or modus ponens, which consists in deriving a conclusion from rules and facts (Socrates is a man (fact), men are mortal (rule), therefore Socrates is mortal), (ii) induction, which consists in deriving a general rule from facts, (iii) abduction, which consists in formulating hypotheses from rules and facts (Socrates is mortal (fact), men are mortal (rule), therefore Socrates is a man). Only deduction can propagate the truth.

Inference engines can work in forward chaining (we start from the IF parts from which we derive the THEN parts which serve as new IF parts, we saturate the knowledge base and we arrive at a conclusion which corresponds to the decision proposal), backward chaining (we formulate a hypothesis and start from the THEN parts, which are used to go back to the IF parts, which become new THEN parts, we saturate the knowledge base and we arrive at an IF part that is true because it is present in the fact base, which makes it possible to validate the initial hypothesis, otherwise we refute the initial hypothesis), or by mixing forward chaining and backward chaining. 

Knowledge-based SADMs currently operate on the same architectural principle, with patient data extracted from the electronic patient record (if interoperable), a knowledge base that models the content of best practice guidelines in a structured format, and an inference engine. Recently, approaches implementing the principles of the Semantic Web have proposed representing knowledge in the form of domain ontologies. An ontology is a structuring of the notions of a domain, with a generalisation/specialisation relationship (e.g. 'arterial hypertension' is a 'cardiovascular disease') enabling reasoning by subsumption to classify the clinical case to be resolved in a class of cases linked to the recommended management.

2 ''Data-driven decision support: learning for decision-making

In the digital approach to decision support, we use machine learning on a sample of n observations (sample size), each characterised by p variables. There is a difference between supervised learning, in which the learning data is resolved in the sense that the solution is available for each observation (for all mammograms, we know whether or not there is a lesion suspected of being breast cancer), and where the aim is to build the model that will predict the solution for each new observation, unsupervised learning, where we have unresolved observations and the objective is to build a taxonomy of observations in order to group them into homogeneous classes that are the most dissimilar (classification or clustering). 

There are many modelling algorithms based on learning methods. While statistical modelling techniques are optimal when the dimensions (n, p) of the learning problem to be solved are "reasonable" (i.e. n >> p), and that the distributional hypotheses are verified (normality), other algorithms compete advantageously with them when the volume of data is large (big data): decision trees, k nearest neighbours, support vector machines (SVM), random forests and deep learning algorithms based on artificial neural networks, the use of which has exploded over the last ten years. These algorithms can be used in a number of freely-available libraries.

In all cases of supervised learning, the method is the same: preparation of the data for the analysis sample, random partitioning of the sample (training sample and evaluation sample often in an 80/20 ratio), implementation of the different algorithms, comparison of performance (using the precision, recall and F1-score indicators) and choice of the best. It has been established that there is no 'best' method known a priori, each being more or less well suited to the problem posed and the nature of the data, and that several need to be tested.