{{knowledge objective
|Identifiant=OIC-105-12-A
|Item_parent=Epilepsy in children and adults
|Item_parent_short=Epilepsy in children and adults
|Rank=A
|Title=Knowing the main advice concerning daily life in a patient with epilepsy
|Description=Driving, daily life, professional future, contraception, pregnancy
|Rubric=Management
|Contributors=
|Order=12}}


==Chronic non-medication care: information to be given to patients ==
Just as important as drug treatment, the care of an epileptic patient is based on comprehensive education. Compliance, tolerance and therapeutic efficacy depend mainly on the quality of this information.

A number of points will need to be addressed during the initial consultations.

=Advice on treatment compliance=
Taking anti-epileptic medication regularly without forgetting. Compliance problems are one of the main causes of persistent seizures under treatment.

To warn of the danger of status epilepticus and life-threatening conditions if anti-epileptic drugs are stopped without warning.

=Hygienic and dietary rules=
Encourage regular sleep.

Avoid or limit the factors that can lead to seizures: sleep debt; prolonged exposure to screens and video games in photosensitive generalised epilepsies of genetic origin (5% of epilepsies); proconvulsant foods or drugs (cocaine, heroin, THC, heavy alcohol consumption or abrupt withdrawal, benzodiazepine withdrawal); avoid excessive excitants such as coffee, tea and undecaffeinated Coca-Cola; avoid certain plants, particularly essential oils (sage, thyme, eucalyptus, etc.) or capsules.) or in capsule form (St John's Wort).

=Home risks=
Prevent the risk of trauma during seizures: furniture without edges, low bedding, hot and cold water taps, protection for hotplates, avoid unsupervised bathing.

=Driving licence=
The decision on fitness to drive will be taken by an approved doctor on the Prefecture's list, on the basis of the medical certificate provided by the treating neurologist.

In the case of newly-diagnosed epilepsy, a seizure-free period of one year under stable treatment is required before an initial qualification for a driving licence can be granted. The patient must be told that driving is forbidden unless approved by the prefecture. The doctor is obliged to inform the patient of the legislation, but is not relieved of his obligation of professional secrecy, including with regard to the occupational physician.

For HGV and public transport vehicle licences, driving is only permitted after 10 years of recovery without recurrence and without any treatment.

=Leasure=
Activities not permitted: scuba diving, unsafe climbing, sport shooting, parachute jumping.

Activities to avoid in the absence of disease control: unsupervised swimming,

In the case of photosensitivity, limit exposure to screens, the use of tablets and telephones in the dark, and going to nightclubs with strobe lighting. Polarised sunglasses may be prescribed if photosensitivity is disabling.

=Schooling=
Schooling must be maintained in the normal environment as far as possible. Special arrangements may be proposed, with the agreement of a third party for examinations and the help of a school life assistant. The establishment of a PAI (individualised reception project) facilitates integration into the school system. Adapted schooling may be envisaged depending on the severity of the disease and co-morbidities.

=Professional activities=
Certain occupations are forbidden to people with epilepsy, even if they are well controlled: jobs requiring the carrying of weapons (military, police, prison warden, etc.), professional driving (HGV, bus, ambulance driver, etc.), lifeguarding, construction (carpenter, zinc worker, etc.). In this context, professional retraining should be considered as soon as possible.

In other cases, situations vary and the preferred contact is the occupational physician. Patients should be encouraged to contact the occupational physician so that their workstation can be adapted. In the event of unfitness for work, an application for recognition as a disabled worker (RQTH) must be submitted.

=Contraception=
Enzyme-inducing antiepileptic drugs (such as carbamazepine) reduce the efficacy of oral oestroprogestins and implantable progestins. An alternative barrier method, the levonorgestrel intrauterine device or copper coil, should be offered.

Taking oral contraceptives containing oestroprogestins may reduce the efficacy of lamotrigine. Caution should be exercised with this combination and the treating neurologist should be informed.

=Pregnancy=
All women of childbearing age, even if they do not wish to become pregnant, should receive full information. Pregnancy is an event which leads to various changes which may be responsible for a worsening of epilepsy. Pregnancy is an event to be prepared for with the treating neurologist.