{{knowledge objective
|Identifiant=OIC-082-05-B
|Item_parent=Acute visual impairment
|Item_parent_short=Acute visual impairment
|Rank=B
|Title=Know the main complementary examinations in ophthalmology and their indications
|Description=Attempt of the anterior segment, of the optic nerve (common objective with Item 81), of the retina (AV, Angiography, macular OCT, ERG)
|Section=Additional examinations
|Contributors=
|Order=5}}
'''Examination in ophthalmology'''

'''1-Interrogation'''

'''2-Measurement of visual acuity:''' the measurement of visual acuity, which is coupled with a study of refraction, is carried out separately for each eye, and at two observation distances (far and near)

'''3- Examination of the anterior segment by biomicroscopy'' (slit lamp): this enables the conjunctiva, cornea, iris, anterior chamber and lens to be examined.

'''4- Measuring eye pressure:''' this is done using an applanation tonometer fitted to the slit lamp or a forced-air tonometer.

'''5- Gonioscopy:''' this is an examination carried out with a slit lamp using a contact lens with a mirror to assess the various elements of the iridocorneal angle.

'''6-Examination of the back of the eye:''' direct biomicroscopy gives a straight image of the back of the eye but with a reduced field of view, it does not allow a vision of relief (method used by internists); indirect biomicroscopy is carried out with a slit lamp using a lens, it gives an inverted image of the back of the eye and allows the vision of relief and an extended field of observation.

'''7-Examination of oculomotricity:''' this examination will examine the six oculomotor muscles of each eye separately (ductions) and in combination (versions).

8- Additional examinations

A- '''Visual field (perimetry)''': The visual field is the portion of space encompassed by the eye looking straight ahead and motionless. The examination of the visual field (or perimetry) studies the sensitivity to light within this space by assessing the subject's perception of light tests of varying intensity and size. There are two main methods of examining the visual field: kinetic perimetry and static perimetry. Kinetic perimetry is particularly suitable for exploring peripheral deficits, particularly hemianopsia and quadranopsia. It is the examination method of choice in neuro-ophthalmology. Static perimetry is mainly indicated for optic nerve pathology, and in particular for diagnosing and monitoring chronic glaucoma. In fact, the first alterations to the visual field are very localised and central.

'''B- Colour vision:''' it is useful to carry out a colour vision assessment to look for dyschromatopsia in two circumstances: 1- to detect a congenital anomaly, such as daltonism. coloured charts are used (pseudo-isochromatic charts, the best known of which is the lshihara chart). 2- in the presence of an acquired ocular condition. The Farnsworth test is usually used, in which the patient is asked to classify coloured tablets. The study of colour vision thus helps in the diagnosis of certain retinal disorders and optic neuropathies. It is also an essential element in monitoring treatments likely to cause retinopathy (synthetic anti-malarials) or optic neuropathy caused by drugs (mainly anti-tuberculosis drugs: ethambutol and isoniazid).

'''C- Fundus angiography:'''' This involves taking images of the fundus after intravenous injection of a fluorescent dye which, depending on the indications, is either fluorescein or indocyanine green. Fluorescein angiography thus provides a dynamic study of retinal vascularisation. Injection of indocyanine green is mainly used to visualise pathological choroidal vessels (vascularisation of a choroidal angioma, choroidal neovessels during age-related macular degeneration).

'''D-''' '''Electrophysiological investigations:'''''

'''1. electroretinogram (ERG):''' The ERG is the recording of the retinal action potential secondary to light stimulation of the retina using a corneal electrode. The ERG reflects a global response of the retina and is only altered in the case of ''extensive retinal lesions'', for example certain hereditary retinal dystrophies.

'''2. Visual evoked potentials (VEPs):''' they represent action potentials arising in the occipital cortex following light stimulation of the retina: they therefore explore the optic pathways in their entirety, from the ganglion cell to the occipital cortex. They can be used to diagnose optic neuropathies, and are particularly useful in multiple sclerosis, where they can be altered in the absence of any clinically detectable optic neuropathy.

'''3. The electro-oculogram (EOG):''' it measures the activity of the pigment epithelium.

'''E-''' '''Ultrasound:''''' The main purpose of A-mode ultrasound is to assess the length of the eyeball; the main purpose of B-mode ultrasound is to detect any retinal detachment in the case of ocular media disorders, to search for and locate an intraocular foreign body or to help diagnose an intraocular or intraorbital tumour.

'''F-Optical coherence tomography (OCT):''' it is used to obtain high-precision slices of the retina. Its main application is the study of macular disorders: premacular membrane, macular hole, macular oedema (diabetes, AMD), visualisation and localisation of choroidal neovessels (AMD). This method is also used to screen for and monitor chronic glaucoma, as it can reveal the loss of optic fibres, the first sign of glaucoma.

'''E- Complementary examinations of the anterior segment:''''

*Corneal topography: This is used to gather information about the curvature or relief (elevation) of the cornea, by projecting and analysing the reflection of a light pattern illuminating or scanning the cornea. The images collected are analysed in the form of colour maps. It is prescribed for analysing astigmatism, particularly in the search for keratoconus.
*Biometry: this is a combined measurement of the curvature of the cornea (or keratometry) and the anterior-posterior (axial) length of the eye. The measurement is carried out using an optical device. It is used to calculate implant power in cataract surgery.





<br />