{{knowledge objective
|Identifiant=OIC-102-03-B
|Item_parent=Diplopia
|Item_parent_short=Diplopia
|Rank=B
|Intitle=Knowing the definition of ophthalmological clinical tests
|Description=cover test, corneal reflection, restitution movement, red lens examination
|Rubric=Positive diagnosis
|Contributors=
|Order=3}}
'''1. inspection:''' - study of corneal reflections: the corneal reflections of a light source directed onto the eyes of a normal subject are both projected onto the centre of the pupil, whereas in the case of deviation, one of the two reflections is not centred.

'''2. Examination of ocular motility in different gaze positions'': this examination is used to observe the six oculomotor muscles of each eye separately (ductions) and in combination (versions).

'''3. Cover-test:''' this test consists of asking the subject to stare at a point situated straight ahead in the distance. One eye is masked by a cover and then the cover is moved to the opposite eye. In subjects with normal oculomotor parallelism, no movement is observed. In the case of paralytic strabismus, a restitution movement is observed.

'''4. Red lens examination:''' this examination consists of placing a red lens in front of one eye (conventionally in front of the right eye) while the subject stares, with his uncovered left eye, at a white spot of light in front of him. Normally, the two images are confused in all gaze positions and the patient sees only one point of light. In the case of an oculomotor imbalance, the two points are separated: the patient sees a red point and a white point, and the shift can be analysed to identify the muscle in deficit.

'''5. Hess-Lancaster or Lancaster test'': this test is used to diagnose oculomotor paralysis, to determine the side of the paralysis and to identify the paralysed muscle or muscles. It is also an examination that allows the evolution of the paralysis to be followed by successive readings. A different coloured glass is placed in front of each of the patient's eyes, a red glass in one eye and a green glass in the other. The patient is asked to move a luminous arrow, seen in red, on a screen and superimpose it on a luminous arrow, seen in green, moved by the examiner. The result is a graphical record of oculomotricity in the different gaze positions.

'''6. Investigation of intrinsic motricity:''' inspection should look for pupillary inequality (= anisocoria). The photomotor reflex (PMR) or pupillary response to light. Illumination of one eye causes miosis of the illuminated eye (direct PLR) and simultaneous miosis of the contralateral eye (consensual PLR).