{{knowledge objective
|Identifiant=OIC-327-02-B
|Item_parent=Principles of integrative medicine, benefits and risks of non-drug interventions and complementary therapies
|Item_parent_short=Principles of integrative medicine, benefits and risks of non-drug interventions and complementary therapies
|Rank=B
|Title=Know the principles of action, usefulness and risks of three main complementary therapies that have been scientifically evaluated.
|Description=Utility and risks of acupuncture, manual medicine-osteopathy and mind-body approaches (therapeutic hypnosis, mindfulness meditation).
|Rubric=Management
|Contributors=
|Order=2}}
'''Rank B :'''

'''Entitulé : Connaître les principales d'action, l'utilité et les risques des principales thérapies complémentaires ayant fait l'objet d'une évaluation scientifique'''


1 Acupuncture and traditional Chinese medicine (TCM)

'''1.1. TCM'' is based on an approach to man as a whole within his environment.                     

It includes acupuncture, Qi Gong (a mind-body practice), pharmacopoeia and dietetics.

'''1.2. Acupuncture'' refers to all the techniques used to stimulate specific points (acupuncture points) for preventive or curative purposes.                                                                      

Its mode of action remains hypothetical. Acupuncture points are located along the meridians. Rather than focusing on the organ, acupuncture treats an "energy imbalance", which may be of external or environmental origin (climatic or infectious factors, etc.) or internal (emotions).

'''Practical details:''' the number of sessions is usually 5 to 10, or even more depending on the pathology, lasting 20 to 45 minutes, at a rate of 1 to 5 per week. ''' '''

'''Indications and outcomes:''' the EBM evidence-based indications for acupuncture are:                                                                 

- High level of evidence: headaches and migraines, rachialgia, joint pain in the limbs and musculoskeletal system, post-operative pain, nausea and vomiting (particularly post-operative and chemotherapy-related), allergic rhinitis.

- Moderate level of evidence: pain from chemo-induced neuropathy, gynaecological pain (dysmenorrhoea, labour pain during childbirth); psychiatric disorders (anxiety, depression, insomnia, addictions); digestive disorders (constipation, irritable bowel syndrome); stroke sequelae (motor, sensory, pain).

'''Risks:''' the INSERM report on the efficacy and safety of acupuncture (2014) concludes that there is a very low prevalence of adverse effects, which are of low intensity and transient. ''' '''

'''Regulations and diploma courses:''' in terms of the legislative framework, in France, the practice is currently reserved for the medical professions: doctors (capacité) and midwives (DIU).                                                                                                              

'''1.3. Qi Gong and Tai Chi'' :

'''Principles''': simultaneously mobilise the mind, body and breath. Practised mainly standing. Tai Chi Chuan, an internal Chinese martial art, combines the principles of Qi Gong with those of the martial arts, whose movements are codified.   

'''Indications and results:''' The effects of Qi Gong exercises, which vary according to the type of patient and the therapeutic indications, have been evaluated, particularly in the prevention of falls/Parkinson's disease, pain (fibromyalgia), mood disorders and anxiety, and in nutrition/metabolism for obese, overweight and/or type 2 diabetes patients.

'''2. Manual medicine - medical osteopathy ''''

'''Principles:''' manual medicine and osteopathy form part of the framework of manual therapies: - Practices aimed at diagnosing and treating a benign, mechanical and/or reflex dysfunction of a joint structure or tissues.

- The aim is to restore maximum range of movement without pain.                                                          

'''Types of manipulation''' include superficial (skin) or deep (muscle, tendon, joint) massages, joint and spinal mobilisations, neuromuscular (myotensive) techniques, manipulations (forced movements of peripheral and spinal joints).                                                                                                                                                   

'''Indications and results:''' due to the limited number of randomised controlled studies, the level of evidence remains low.                                  Indications: vertebral pain dysfunctions (cervicalgia, dorsalgia, lumbago, coccygodynia) as a first-line treatment when the form is common in the acute phase, and as an adjunctive treatment for chronic forms. Beyond this, all common joint or tendinomuscular dysfunctions are accessible to manual and osteopathic treatment when contraindications have been ruled out.                                      - The main effects concern spinal pathologies, improving pain and function in the short term.

 '''Contraindications and risks:'''

-Pathologies that expose the patient to an uncontrolled risk during handling: cancers, infections, fractures, acute inflammatory pathologies, etc.

-Pathologies exposing the patient to neurological risk (malformation, disco-radicular conflict) or vascular risk (vertebro-basilar insufficiency).

Pathologies exposing the patient to neurological risk (malformation, disco-radicular conflict) or vascular risk (vertebro-basilar insufficiency).  

'''Regulations:''' Law of 2 March 2002: manipulations are no longer reserved for doctors alone (holders of a DIU) but for any person, whether a carer (physiotherapist, midwife, etc.) or a non-carer, who holds a diploma in osteopathy, except for cervical manipulations (only by doctors).

'''3. Hypnosis , hypno-analgesia ''''

'''Principles''': hypnosis is a "state of psychological functioning by which a subject, in relationship with a practitioner, experiences an expanded field of consciousness."                                                                                                                                                   

- Hypnoanalgesia is used for the management of acute pain, and must be carried out by healthcare professionals in their field of expertise.

- Therapeutic hypnosis is psychological in nature, as part of a psychotherapeutic approach.

'''Indications and results:''' hypnosis has a low to moderate level of scientific evidence, which allows it to be included in medical practices as soon as practitioners are trained, for :

- Managing anxiety

- Treatment of "functional" disorders

- Treatment of acute or chronic pain, alone or in addition to other treatments

In cases of acute pain, hypnosis can be used to modulate the sensory component (pain intensity) and the emotional component (associated anxiety), in a number of situations where it can be used alone or as a complement to other analgesic treatments: pain induced by care (dressings, sutures, punctures, reduction of dislocation, etc.), in dentistry, obstetrics, in the operating theatre in the context of hypnosedation, where hypnosis can significantly reduce the doses of sedative and analgesic agents. In practice, several hypnotic techniques can be used: conversational hypnosis combining positive communication, diversion of attention and confusion for short procedures, or formal hypnosis for longer procedures by maintaining the hypnotic trance (allowing the patient to experience a pleasant situation, for example) during the treatment or operation. Hypnosis is also useful for preparing patients before an operation by reducing pre-operative anxiety.                                                                                                                                                 

In the case of chronic pain, patient management is more complex and relies on a multidisciplinary approach in which hypnosis can play a role alongside other treatments. Several sessions are needed to give patients new resources for coping with their pain, to teach them to change their relationship with their pain and to manage it differently.    

'''Contraindications and risks''': The practice of hypnosis by a health professional or psychologist can be applied to all patients without contraindication, within the framework of the practitioner's skills. However, in patients with a psychotic profile, the delirium in the active phase does not allow the relationship to be established and work from the patient's internal world is prevented.

'''Self-hypnosis:''' teaching self-hypnosis to patients from the start of their treatment teaches them to become autonomous and to take charge of their own health. A few minutes of self-hypnosis each day is enough to maintain the therapeutic work put in place by the practitioner.

'''4. Mindfulness meditation

Definition and principles

'''-'''' Mindfulness meditation involves the practitioner or patient focusing attention on the sensations of the body, the breath, sounds, thoughts and emotions.                                                                                                                 

- It leads the meditator to be particularly present and attentive to the present moment, with kindness and distance from judgements, mental comments or self-criticism.

'''-'''' Meditation helps to manage stress, stabilise emotions and develop attention. It shows that focused attention can be a source of blindness, which can have serious consequences for carers (e.g. during a clinical examination).                                                                                                                                        

Indications and results

- Management of anxiety and depression: clinical studies are positive, with a high level of evidence for the prevention of depressive relapses in stabilised patients

- Management of chronic illness, particularly in the aftermath of cancer treatment: meditation improves quality of life, with a return to the ability to be more present, and reduces mental ruminations and anxious anticipation.    

- Management of chronic pain: the benefits of meditation have also been demonstrated in various clinical studies, with the practice of meditation making it easier to distinguish between the pain itself, which is not altered, and the emotional suffering that accompanies chronic pain. Meditation is recommended as a second-line treatment for neuropathic pain.

- Treating sleep disorders: difficulties in falling asleep can be improved by meditation, which allows patients to "disengage" from their thoughts and focus their attention on their bodily sensations and breathing, inducing relaxation that helps them fall asleep.                                                                                                                                                               

For carers, who are often exposed to stressful situations, the practice of meditation can help to develop a habit of "taking care of oneself", which is still underdeveloped. These practices have been shown to help prevent burn-out in the healthcare professions and among students. ''' '''

'''Risks''': learning meditation deserves to be accompanied by a trained teacher, who can determine whether the apprentice meditator can approach these practices without risk, and who can give guidance and advice if any side effects (rare and mainly observed in people with a psychiatric history) appear during the practice.

'''Conclusion'''

Practitioners can broaden their therapeutic armoury by supplementing biomedical treatments with NMIs and complementary therapies, in the fields of prevention, pain treatment, chronic disease management, support for the disabled, mental health, childhood and ageing well, particularly in ''chronic, painful, anxious, insomniac subjects, and/or those at risk of iatrogenicity with conventional treatments''.

Several of them (physical exercise, nutritional approaches, acupuncture, hypnosis, meditation, etc.) have already been the subject of extensive clinical studies, but we must remain vigilant about their "potential risks", and the "practitioners" who implement them, who have every interest in being health professionals, aware of these risks.