{{knowledge objective
|Identifiant=OIC-288-13-A
|Item_parent=Hemorrhoidal pathology
|Item_parent_short=Hemorrhoidal pathology
|Rank=A
|Title=Knowing the main principles of medicinal and non-medicinal management of haemorrhoids
|Description=
|Rubric=Management
|Contributors=
|Order=13}}

'''Cf: [[Know the treatment of external haemorrhoidal thrombosis 2C-288-PC-A03|2C-288-PC-A03]], [[Know the indications for surgical treatment 2C-288-PC-B01|2C-288-PC-B01]]'''''

==a) Hygienic dietary rules===
Hygienic dietary rules are a major element in the therapeutic management of haemorrhoidal disease. Dietary exclusion diets are not effective. Generally speaking, dietary hygiene rules aim to combat chronic constipation (cf [[Constipation in children and adults|item 283]]). Treating chronic constipation is therefore a common-sense measure aimed at limiting the onset of haemorrhoidal disease, preventing recurrences and perhaps even complications.  Dietary changes that help to correct stool consistency and regulate transit are recommended. Introducing a diet rich in soluble fibre (linseed, chia seeds, blond psyllium, etc.) and correcting constipation can reduce the time spent having a bowel movement and reduce dyschezia. This helps to resolve symptoms in the acute phase of haemorrhoidal attacks, prevent attacks and treat chronic haemorrhoidal disease.

==b) Medication:==
'''Treatment of internal haemorrhoidal disease:'''

Diosmin has proven efficacy in the treatment of haemorrhoidal attacks because it reduces the intensity and duration of symptoms''. Local topicals include all ''emollient products'' for topical application (creams, ointments and suppositories). They contain agents capable of reducing the inflammatory component of the haemorrhoidal crisis, acting on the oedematous component of the crisis and promoting healing. Some topicals also have analgesic properties through local anaesthetics. Like the class of venotonics, these drugs are offered as short courses of treatment for haemorrhoidal attacks. They are not indicated in cases of chronic pathology, mainly dominated by bleeding or defecatory anal procidence.

'''Treatment of external haemorrhoidal disease:'''

The only manifestation of external haemorrhoids is external haemorrhoidal thrombosis, which is treated by incision or excision (see below). However, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are an alternative to incision/excision (see below). Short courses of corticosteroids are an alternative in cases where NSAIDs and surgical treatment are contraindicated, particularly where there is a strong oedematous component.

==c) Principles of instrumental and surgical treatments
The term ''instrumental haemorrhoid treatment'' refers to all the procedures carried out to constrain the haemorrhoidal anal procidence, ''reinforce the supporting tissue and form a scar'' at the top of the haemorrhoid. These therapeutic methods are carried out on an outpatient basis, through an anoscopy and most often during a specialised gastroenterology consultation. These strategies constitute the basic treatment for chronic haemorrhoidal disease. They should not be carried out during a flare-up of the disease and do not represent a preventive treatment for external haemorrhoidal thrombosis. Various techniques can be used to create a chemical (sclerosis), ischaemic (elastic ligation) or thermal (infrared, bipolar coagulation, cryotherapy) eschar. The treatment is applied in a sector, in the rectal mucosa (no thermoalgesic sensitivity) above (and not on top of) the internal haemorrhoidal tissue. These methods do not remove or sclerotise the haemorrhoidal tissue itself. When the indications are well-targeted, they provide significant benefit more than three times out of four. However, their effectiveness decreases with the length of follow-up. These methods may give rise to rare complications (bleeding following the fall of an eschar, infections). Elastic ligation offers the best risk/benefit ratio, but is contraindicated in patients taking anticoagulants.


Surgical haemorrhoid treatment'' is the term used to describe all procedures designed to treat haemorrhoidal tissue under general, peridural or locoregional anaesthetic. There are "two types of haemorrhoidal surgery": "those which remove" the haemorrhoidal tissue (known as haemorrhoidectomy) and "those which fix or tighten" the haemorrhoidal tissue using a mechanical process (pexy with wire or mechanical forceps) or heat (radiofrequency, laser). The first type is the benchmark in terms of effectiveness and is often the only procedure possible in cases of anatomically advanced haemorrhoidal disease or recurrent external thrombosis. The second type is more similar to the instrumental treatments mentioned above: it is simpler, often quicker and less painful. Patients are often immobilised for a shorter period after the procedure. There is a greater risk of recurrence. Complications are inherent in any type of surgery, but rare functional sequelae such as incontinence must be prevented and assessed before the procedure.

The treatment of external haemorrhoidal thrombosis is not, strictly speaking, a surgical procedure. However, ''an incision or excision'' can easily be performed in consultation. With a few precautions and a little patience, this strategy is effective in ''relieving pain and shortening its course''. The alternative is to prescribe non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (see above).