{{knowledge objective
|Identifiant=OIC-011-01-A
|Item_parent=Violence and health
|Item_parent_short=Violence and health
|Rank=A
|Title=Knowing the different types of interpersonal violence: at school, at home and at work
|Description=Definition, repercussions and mechanisms common to interpersonal violence
|Rubric=Definition
|Contributors=Roberto Poma
|Order=1}}

Violence is defined as the threat or deliberate use of physical force or power against oneself, against others or against a group or community that results in, or has a significant likelihood of resulting in, injury, death, psychological harm, impaired development or deprivation. This definition encompasses both (a) the act itself, (b) the various consequences that may result, as well as (c) the various forms that violence may take. Further refinements can be made to this definition depending on the context in which the violence occurs, the relationship between the perpetrator and the victim, or the particular type of violence, such as domestic violence. There are three types of violence: interpersonal violence between individuals, collective violence (social, political and economic) and self-inflicted violence (suicidal behaviour and self-harm).

School violence'' refers to all words, attitudes, gestures, actions, games and punishments that cause moral or physical injury to a person. There are six main forms of violence verbal violence (insults, threats, mockery, humiliation); physical violence (hitting, shoving, spanking, mistreatment of an object belonging to a person) ; social violence (exclusion or invisibilisation of an individual or group because of their ethnic origin, religion or disability, spreading rumours about others); material violence (stealing someone else's belongings or money, breaking or damaging their property or that of a group of people); sexual violence (insults, words, gestures of a sexual nature; forcing a pupil to have sex in exchange for good marks); cyber-violence (threats, lynching, denigration, slander, identity theft, dissemination of personal information, distribution of violent videos from websites, social networks or smartphones, publication of humiliating images). The specificity of this violence is its public nature, amplified by the web, which acts as a sounding board. When it takes place at school, the violence is mainly observed in the playground, the students' home, the classroom, the administrative offices, the sports field, the corridors, behind the classrooms, the infirmary, the toilets, etc. When it takes place at school, the violence is mainly observed in the playground, the students' home, the classroom, the administrative offices, the sports field, the corridors, behind the classrooms, the infirmary, the toilets, etc. When it occurs outside the school, it can happen on public transport, on the way to school, at the shopkeeper's or on the playgrounds around the school, for example.

Domestic violence" occurs when a person uses or threatens to use physical, psychological or sexual violence within a current or dissolved family, marital or conjugal relationship. This definition shows that domestic violence also occurs in couples who are not living together or who are separated. Domestic violence encompasses various patterns and forms of violence. Nevertheless, it is possible to define the main characteristics of domestic violence which enable it to be differentiated from other acts of violence, e.g. violence in the public space. 1) There is an emotional bond between the perpetrator and the victim. This bond often persists even after separation or divorce. 2) Most violent acts take place in the home, i.e. in a place that is supposed to offer safety and protection. 3) By using or threatening to use physical, sexual or psychological violence, the perpetrator violates the victim's physical and/or psychological integrity. 4) Most of the time, domestic violence is perpetrated over a long period of time and its intensity generally increases over time. The exception is occasional aggressive behaviour in conflict situations. 5) There is a clear link between dominance in the relationship and the use of violence. In the case of domestic violence, the perpetrator often benefits from an asymmetrical balance of power. The risk of violence is lowest when couples live on an equal footing. 6) The specific dynamics of violence in domestic violence - the spiral of violence - must be taken into account so that counselling and intervention services can be tailored to meet needs.

Workplace violence occurs when one or more employees are attacked in work-related circumstances. It ranges from disrespect to a desire to harm or destroy, from incivility to physical aggression. Violence in the workplace can take the form of verbal aggression, behavioural aggression, particularly sexist aggression, physical aggression, etc. It generally includes: threatening behaviour (fist gestures, destruction of property, objects thrown); oral or written threats (any expression of intent to inflict harm) harassment : any behaviour that demeans, humiliates, embarrasses, worries, annoys or insults a person, whether through words, gestures, intimidation, coercion or other inappropriate activities); verbal excesses (swearing, insults or condescending language); acts of physical aggression (blows with the hand or foot, pushing, shoving). There are two categories. External violence concerns employees' exposure to violence from users, customers or patients. Internal violence is perpetrated against professionals, between two individuals or between an individual and a group. It can be directed at the individual him/herself (suicide) or diverted towards materials and equipment (sabotage or destruction). Violent acts can also occur in the workplace, in the form of attacks on colleagues or superiors, or in the form of sabotage of installations or machines (destruction of work tools, kicking of machines).