{{knowledge objective
|Identifiant=OIC-011-08-A
|Item_parent=Violence and health
|Item_parent_short=Violence and health
|Rank=A
|Title=Acknowledging institutional or systemic violence
|Description=Like any institution, a school can generate violence through 3 types of factors a) human factors (hierarchical relations; relations between colleagues, etc.) b) institutional and organisational factors c) social factors (social, economic, political, etc.).b) institutional and organisational factors: organisation of work, departments, structures, units; allocation of staff; initial or ongoing training; organisation of communal life; structures not adapted to the pathology of patients/residents; coordination of care; communication during transmission, etc.);c) architectural factors: layout and design of premises; security of premises and equipment; reception and management of patient flow, etc.).
|Rubric=Diagnosis
|Contributors=Roberto Poma
|Order=8}}

Institutional violence" is any action taken in or by an institution, or lack of action, which causes a child unnecessary physical or psychological suffering and/or hinders his or her further development" (Stanislaw Tomckiewicz). Institutional violence (or violence in institutions) is generally defined by its consequences, for the person subjected to it, in terms of suffering and hindrance to their development and well-being. This definition can be extended to "anything that gives precedence to the interests of the institution over the interests of the child" (Éliane Corbet). Institutional violence therefore covers a broad field, encompassing both actions and omissions, and is defined by its consequences for the well-being of the person cared for in the institution. It covers the violence that occurs "in the background", the discontinuities and mini-ruptures in daily life, as well as actual brutality. Violence in institutions also covers isolated acts committed by professionals or other residents in the institution, without necessarily implicating the operation of the institution.

The concept of '''''violence structurelle''''' was introduced in 1971 by Johan Galtung and Tord Hoivik in their article "Structural and direct violence". According to Galtung, structural violence occurs when political and economic structures prevent individuals or groups from realising their spiritual or somatic potential. Structural violence should therefore be understood as anything that destroys people in their psychic, physical and spiritual being anonymously and without them being personally attacked by weapons (for example, a gifted child who is deprived of an education because of his or her race; a man who starves to death in the midst of a world abundant in food). This violence creates a considerable gap between an existing reality (illiteracy, hunger) and a possible reality (education, health). The sources of structural violence are to be found in the laws, rules, standards or habits of a given structure (political, judicial, family, social, school, religious, military or work structures), when they physically and/or psychologically harm individuals or groups, in particular through constraints, threats, sanctions or limitations that hinder their functioning and development. Structural violence takes the form of institutionalised racist, nationalist, religious, sexist, sexual, generational, economic, social and political discrimination. The reduction of structural violence is based on concepts such as social justice, equity, emancipation, participation, freedom, responsibility, human rights and well-being. It is also concretely linked to a broad conception of the fight against underdevelopment and authoritarianism.

Symbolic violence'' is the cultural or community dimension of structural violence. It rules out any alternative solution, leaving only the option proposed by the local social order as self-evident and the only valid one.