{{knowledge objective
|Identifiant=OIC-014-01-A
|Item_parent=Death
|Item_parent_short=Death
|Rank=A
|Title=Knowing the main representations and social practices surrounding death (anthropology)
|Description= Different views of death in different societies and cultures. Knowledge of rites according to the main religions. Ideas and anxieties about death inherent in serious illness.
|Rubric=Definition
|Contributors=Gilles Moutot,Guillaume Grandazzi
|Order=1}}

Although each of us will be confronted with death, it remains first and foremost a matter for "those who remain", i.e. the bereaved living. So death is not just a biological phenomenon: it is always a social event, ritualised in different ways depending on the culture and religion. In this respect, the theory of the five phases of mourning developed in 1970 by the psychiatrist Elisabeth Kübler-Ross (denial, anger, bargaining, depression, acceptance) is a highly situated construct: it proposes a normalisation of mourning that is both medicocentric and Western-centric, largely ignoring the diversity of socio-cultural factors, the historicity of relationships to death and the gains of anthropological knowledge.

There is no universal definition of mourning or universal meaning of death that would apply to all cultures, even if the ritualisation of death is an anthropological invariant. In most traditional societies, death is seen more as a process, leading from the world of the living to the world of the dead through various types of ritual, marking biological death, mourning and social death. These markers of death and mourning can also be found in modern societies, and have been historically codified by monotheistic cults. However, in the current phase of secularisation that marks these societies (rational explanation of natural and social phenomena, progress in scientific and technical knowledge, secularisation of morals, break-up of traditional communities and individualisation of life paths), people are dying more and more often in institutions that are located away from social life, as if they had to withdraw socially before dying biologically. Even if people wish to die at home, the prolonged agony phase makes it very difficult for their loved ones to support them right up to the end of their life, which tends to be covered up, and delayed in a distressing way, by the period between life and death that we now call the "end of life".

This situation appears to be the current outcome of a historical change in the perception of death and the role of medicine. Since the 19th century, medicine has gradually ceased to be confined to the determination of death, considered as a passage into the afterlife (the call of the doctor to the bedside of the dying person thus prefiguring the arrival of the priest to give the holy sacraments, in the case of the Catholic religion), but is increasingly aimed at prolonging life. The more life and its end become objects of knowledge (and of technical intervention), the more the inclusion of death in a form of meaningful continuity with existence (notably in the form of a spiritual fulfilment, variously ritualised according to religious reference systems) becomes more evident. It is this development that Norbert Elias summed up in "The Solitude of the Dying": "It is not really death, but knowledge about death that creates problems for man".

As our knowledge has evolved, these "problems" have changed. From the 19th century onwards, with the advent of scientific medicine and the search for unquestionable proof of death, the fear of premature burial developed. In the 20th century, advances in medicine led to the medicalisation of death and its redefinition, in particular with the gradual imposition of the criterion of encephalic death (linked to concerns about removing organs for grafts and transplants). At the beginning of the 21st century, our relationship with death seems to be linked to new fears and anxieties, the result of developments in the previous two centuries (including, in particular, advances in resuscitation); this concerns states that are no longer quite life and yet not quite death: comas, vegetative states, long 'end of life', etc. These new fears and anxieties are the result of a number of factors.