{{knowledge objective
|Identifiant=OIC-019-11-A
|Item_parent=Social security. Health insurance. Supplementary insurance. Supplementary health insurance (CSS). Medical consumption. Social protection. Medical consumption and health economics
|Item_parent_short=Social security. Health insurance. Supplementary insurance. Supplementary health insurance (CSS). Medical consumption. Social protection. Medical consumption and health economics
|Rank=A
|Title=Knowing the coordinated care pathway
|Description=Definition and how, who?
|Rubric=Definition
|Contributors=Anne-Laurence Le Faou
|Order=11}}

Its aim is to ''improve access to care, the quality of care, and make better use of resources''. The "linchpin of the coordinated care pathway" is the "preferred doctor" that "each insured person or entitled person aged 16 or over" has declared, with their consent, to their health insurance organisation.

The chosen treating doctor ''may be a general practitioner or a specialist''. He or she may be a hospital doctor. Patients are free to change their choice at any time.

The attending physician :

- provides care on a regular basis;

- guides patients through the coordinated care pathway. It puts patients in touch with other healthcare professionals (other specialists, hospital doctors, etc.);

- '''manages the medical file.''' It centralises all information relating to your care and state of health. It keeps your medical record up to date (test results, diagnoses, treatments, etc.). If the patient has created a shared medical record (formerly a personal medical record), he or she can access all the data stored in it by healthcare professionals;

- '''provides personalised prevention:''' vaccination follow-up, organised screening tests (e.g. colorectal cancer screening), help to stop smoking, health advice based on lifestyle, age or family history, nutritional advice, etc.

- '''établir le''' protocole de soins '''si le patient est atteint d'une affection de longue durée''. Care will be reimbursed at 100% by the Assurance Maladie.


Patients remain free not to have recourse to their GP or not to comply with his or her referral prescriptions. However, patients "who do not wish to join the scheme will have their out-of-pocket expenses increased". When a ''patient consults a specialist directly without being referred by their GP, they are subject to an increase in co-payment (70% instead of 30%)''. Specialist doctors may charge extra fees when they see a patient who has not previously been referred to them by a regular doctor as part of the coordinated care pathway (authorised extra fees''). These extra fees are payable by the patient.


Some doctors are directly accessible:

The gynaecologist, for the periodic clinical examination, including screening, prescription and monitoring of contraception, pregnancy monitoring or medical termination of pregnancy;

The ophthalmologist, for prescriptions and renewals of glasses or contact lenses, and glaucoma screening and monitoring.

'''The''' '''psychiatrist or neuropsychiatrist''' for people aged between 16 and 25 ;

The stomatologist, for oral and dental procedures (preventive oral and dental care, conservative care, surgery, dental prostheses, dento-maxillo-facial orthopaedic treatment).

This specialist doctor will tick the "Specific direct access" box on the treatment form. The patient will be reimbursed as normal.