{{knowledge objective
|Identifiant=OIC-019-09-A
|Item_parent=Social security. Health insurance. Supplementary insurance. Supplementary health insurance (CSS). Medical consumption. Social protection. Medical consumption and health economics
|Item_parent_short=Social security. Health insurance. Supplementary insurance. Supplementary health insurance (CSS). Medical consumption. Social protection. Medical consumption and health economics
|Rank=A
|Title=Knowing the missions of health insurance under the general social security system
|Description=Organisation of care
|Rubric=Definition
|Contributors=Anne-Laurence Le Faou
|Order=9}}

The Caisse nationale d'assurance maladie (CNAM) manages the risks of sickness, maternity, disability and death, as well as accidents at work and occupational diseases. Its main mission is to "pay for the care provided to insured persons". It also contributes to '''improving the health of the population'', to the <nowiki/>''efficiency of the healthcare system'' and to the '''control of healthcare expenditure'''. To fulfil its missions, health insurance has several levers of intervention including:

- definition of the "scope of reimbursable procedures" based on medical recommendations and opinions issued by the French National Authority for Health (HAS);

- the ''pricing of procedures and level of reimbursement'': common classification of medical procedures (CCAM), activity-based pricing (T2A) for health establishments and general nomenclature of professional procedures

Within the framework of the Union nationale des caisses d'assurance maladie (UNCAM), which groups together the national health insurance schemes (the general scheme and the MSA), it conducts the "conventionnelle policy" (relations between health professionals and the health insurance scheme, in particular the tariffs for procedures including consultations).

The health insurance scheme contributes to "better matching of healthcare provision to the needs of insured persons within the framework of the regional health agencies, informing insured persons about the characteristics of local healthcare provision and the proper use of healthcare products", participates in the "prevention policy" (cancer screening), and develops a "support system for patients with serious pathologies" (monitoring diabetic patients as part of the Sophia programme, for example).

Sickness insurance contributes to the "dissemination of HAS recommendations to professionals" (carried out by sickness insurance delegates) and draws up "comparative profiles of activity and prescriptions".

Finally, the health insurance scheme is responsible for the "medical control of expenditure". Within each region, the health insurance scheme participates in the development, under the aegis of the ARS, of a regional multi-annual risk management programme which complements the national risk management programmes.