{{knowledge objective
|Identifiant=OIC-249-07-B
|Item_parent=Therapeutic changes in lifestyle (diet and physical activity) in adults and children
|Item_parent_short=Therapeutic changes in lifestyle (diet and physical activity) in adults and children
|Rank=B
|Title=Savoir orienter vers la pratique d'une activité physique adaptée
|Description=Prescription - Potential participants - Adaptation according to age and co-morbidities
|Rubric=Management
|Contributors=
|Order=7}}
''Prescription of physical activity (PA)''

Physical activity is prescribed in terms of type, intensity, duration, frequency and context.

The aim of a no-counter-indication visit with a clinical examination is to rule out any counter-indications linked to general condition, co-morbidities or the side-effects of treatments. Absolute contraindications to moderate physical activity are rare, and the main purpose of this examination is to set reasonable objectives tailored to the patient. The examination is also used to detect injury risk factors, to look for factors incompatible with intense physical activity, and to give advice on injury prevention, recovery, nutrition and the fight against doping. If necessary, this visit will lead to the drafting of a medical certificate stating that there are no contraindications to practising sport, which is the responsibility of the doctor, who must be a doctor of medicine (thésé). This certificate is compulsory if you wish to take part in sporting competitions.


This visit should include a search for :

- Family history, particularly of sudden death and cardiovascular disease

- Medical history: cardiac, pulmonary, neurological (including epilepsy), trauma (including repeated sprains), coagulation disorders, etc.

- Vaccinations

- Toxic habits (smoking, alcohol, performance-enhancing drugs, etc.)

- Medicinal and non-medicinal treatments

- Functional signs at rest and during exercise

A full and systematic clinical examination must be carried out.


No additional paraclinical examination is essential in asymptomatic young people under 35 with no family history of hereditary/congenital cardiovascular disease or sudden death before the age of 50. More detailed investigations are required in the case of competitive sport, in sedentary patients wishing to take up strenuous activity, and in patients at high cardiovascular risk.


In all patients, the overall cardiovascular risk will be assessed and additional tests will be prescribed as appropriate (echocardiography, resting ECG, stress ECG, functional imaging, ventilatory measurements, etc.).


Contraindications to practising a sport may be temporary or permanent; they may be specific to a particular sport.

- Examples of specific contraindications: loss of a paired organ (eye/kidney/gland...)/haemophilia/anticoagulant treatment and violent/contact sport; comitiality and water sports...

- Examples of temporary contraindications: fever, infectious mononucleosis, unbalanced pathology, etc.


Adaptation according to age and co-morbidities''.

The intensity of physical activity for patients suffering from chronic illnesses should be moderate, and resumption should always be gradual. Heart rate remains a good means of monitoring intensity (max theoretical heart rate = 220 - age).


Physiotherapists are teachers (sometimes referred to as medico-sports educators) with specific training. They may work for sports clubs, associations (particularly sport and health networks) or sports federations.

Some towns or mutual insurance companies pay for the APA to be set up.