{{knowledge objective
|Identifiant=OIC-326-02-A
|Item_parent=Regulatory framework for therapeutic prescribing and recommendations for correct use
|Item_parent_short=Regulatory framework for therapeutic prescribing and recommendations for correct use
|Rank=A
|Intitle=Knowing how to explain the prescription of a generic drug or a biosimilar
|Description=Savoir expliquer la prescription d'un médicament générique ou d'un biosimilaire
|Rubric=Prescribing
|Contributors=Florian Lemaitre
|Order=2}}


==Generic drug ==
A generic drug is a drug for which the patent on the active ingredient has expired and which is therefore in the public domain. In this situation, it can be freely produced by a pharmaceutical laboratory, provided that it has the same qualitative and quantitative composition of active ingredients as the originator drug. It must also have the same pharmaceutical form (tablet, capsule, oral solution, etc.) and must demonstrate that it has identical pharmacokinetic characteristics to the originator. This is demonstrated in a bioequivalence study. Generic medicines may, however, contain excipients that are different from those of the originator. Notable excipients are listed to help prescribers decide whether to replace an originator drug with a generic drug. The appearance, colour and taste of a generic drug may also be different from the originator drug. In most cases, the generic drug is identified by the international non-proprietary name (INN), the name of the laboratory, the strength and the pharmaceutical form of the drug. Substituting a generic drug for an originator drug serves the economic purpose of controlling healthcare costs.

==Authorisation of generic medicinal products ==
Generic medicines have a simplified marketing authorisation (MA) procedure. In practice, marketing authorisation for these medicines is obtained for the indication of the originator medicine on the basis of the pharmaceutical dossier and bioequivalence studies. The latter type of study must be randomised, cross-over and single-dose. Bioequivalence is achieved if the 90% confidence intervals of the geometric mean of the maximum concentrations (Cmax) and the area under the concentration-time curve (AUC) of the generic drug are within the range 80-125% of those of the originator drug. For medicines with a narrow therapeutic margin (medicines for which a small variation in concentration will modify the effect of the medicine), the acceptance margin in bioequivalence studies is reduced to an interval of 90-111%.

==''Substitution of a generic drug'''==
Generic drugs are listed in the generics register in groups containing the reference drug and the various authorised generic drugs. Substitutions of medicines are only possible within the same generic group. Substitutions may be made between the reference drug and a drug in the generic group, or between generic drugs.

As prescriptions must be in INN, the prescribing doctor or the pharmacist dispensing the medicine are authorised to substitute a medicine with a generic.

The prescriber and/or pharmacist making the substitution must take account of the presence of excipients with a known effect when making the substitution:

*In particular, if the medicinal product to be substituted does not contain an excipient with a notorious effect, a generic product that does not contain an excipient with a notorious effect should be prescribed/dispensed in preference.
*If the medicinal product to be substituted contains an excipient with a notorious effect, a generic containing the same excipient or a generic without an excipient with a notorious effect should be prescribed/dispensed.

==Refusal to substitute ==
Under very specific conditions, requiring medical justification, the prescribing doctor may refuse to allow a generic drug to be substituted for a prescription. In this case, he/she must write "non-substitutable" on the prescription. This objection to substitution is only possible in 3 situations:

*Prescription in children under 6 years of age when there is no suitable galenic form.
*Prescription in a patient with a contraindication to an excipient of the generic medicinal product in the event that this excipient is present in all the specialities of the generic group and is not present in the composition of the originator.
*Prescription of a medicinal product with a narrow therapeutic margin, the list of which is defined by decree, in a patient whose treatment with this medicinal product is balanced.

Pharmacists are authorised to substitute a drug with a generic from the same group if the drug is not labelled "non-substitutable" and if this substitution does not result in additional costs for the health insurance scheme.

==''Biosimilar medicinal product'''==
A biosimilar medicinal product is a biological medicinal product (involving a biological source, protein or cell, for their production) with the same qualitative and quantitative composition in active substance and the same pharmaceutical form as a reference biological medicinal product which has obtained marketing authorisation. The biological nature, the complexity of the molecule and the difficulty involved in producing these medicines mean that this type of medicine does not meet the conditions for being considered a generic medicine.

==Authorisation of biosimilar medicinal products ==
Biosimilar medicinal products require additional preclinical and clinical pharmacodynamic and toxicological data proving comparability in terms of pharmacological mode of action, efficacy and clinical safety. As these are biological medicinal products, it is also essential to study their immunogenicity.

If a biosimilar medicinal product demonstrates, in an indication deemed to be representative, comparable efficacy and a comparable safety profile to a reference biological medicinal product, this biosimilar medicinal product may obtain, by extrapolation, authorisation for the other indications approved for the reference biological medicinal product (e.g. marketing authorisation for biosimilars of anti-tumour necrosis factor alpha in all the indications of the reference biological medicinal product after demonstration of its efficacy and safety in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis).

==Interchangeability of biosimilar medicinal products ==
By definition, a biosimilar medicinal product cannot be substituted in the same way as a generic medicinal product, since it is not an exact copy of the reference medicinal product. However, these biosimilar medicines are 'interchangeable' at the prescriber's initiative. This interchangeability is possible at any time during a patient's treatment, but requires: informing the patient and obtaining his or her consent; recording the change to a biosimilar in the patient's file; and ensuring appropriate monitoring after the change to the biosimilar.