{{knowledge objective
|Identifiant=OIC-008-02-B
|Item_parent=Discrimination
|Item_parent_short=Discrimination
|Rank=B
|Title=Knowing the main effects of discrimination on social inequalities and inequalities in health
|Description=Being a victim of discrimination (linked to sexuality, lifestyle choices, physical appearance, cultural origin, etc.) has a negative impact on socio-economic integration and mental and physical health.
|Rubric=Definition
|Contributors=Nicolas Lechopier,Kessel Nils,
|Order=2}}

Discrimination accentuates the social determinants of health

Social inequalities in health stem from historical processes of social and economic exclusion, based on origins, religion, socio-economic status, gender, mental health status, sexual orientation, etc. The influence of living environment and social identity on the onset of disease creates a social gradient in health.

Health is in fact socially determined: "International relations and national policies determine the organisation of society at national and local levels, and thus give rise to social statuses and a hierarchy, by virtue of which populations are organised according to level of income and education, employment, gender, ethnic origin and other factors. The position of individuals on the social ladder influences the conditions in which they grow up, learn, live, work and age, and their vulnerability to disease and its consequences". (WHO, Commission on Social Determinants of Health).

For example, difficulties in accessing housing or employment, a polluted and noisy living environment, the experience of exclusion or inequality... All these factors can add up to a multiplier effect.

Discrimination increases stress

Experiencing discrimination contributes to the stress experienced by people who are subjected to it, which can result in poorer cardiovascular health. People exposed to ethno-racial discrimination are in poorer health according to a meta-analysis (Paradies 2015). This discrimination is a risk factor for depressive, anxiety and psychotic symptoms, as well as for suicidal behaviour (Bardol et al. 2020). They can accumulate in people's experience and 'wear them down' (Wilkinson 2015). The accumulation of disadvantages has a corrosive dimension (Pelet, Charles and Dergham 2020).

Discrimination can also make it difficult for professionals to practise, particularly because of the tension between ethical requirements and the reality on the ground.

'''Discrimination is a major contributor to non-take-up.''''

Non-take-up occurs when people affected by public policies do not use the benefits or services to which they are entitled. Non-take-up is a widespread phenomenon, particularly in healthcare: in addition to factors linked to geographical distance, territorial disparities and unequal health literacy, discrimination can be a direct contributory factor. Anticipating rejection, stigmatising remarks, having to pay in advance or having to pay more, people from vulnerable populations and/or in economically precarious situations may decide not to visit a professional, delaying their treatment or worsening their state of health. In addition to encountering difficulties in accessing healthcare or facing barriers that prevent them from accessing care, some people no longer find their place in the social protection and healthcare system and no longer accept the nature of the interactions it offers (https://odenore.msh-alpes.fr/).