{{knowledge objective
|Identifiant=OIC-008-01-A
|Item_parent=Discrimination
|Item_parent_short=Discrimination
|Rank=A
|Title=Knowing the definition and mechanisms of discrimination
|Description=Stereotypes, stigmatisation phenomena
|Rubric=Definition
|Contributors=Nicolas Lechopier,Kessel Nils,
|Order=1}}

'''Definition'''

Discrimination consists of making a difference in treatment, based on prohibited criteria, which results in harm to the individual.

International conventions list the criteria that may not be used to treat people differently: ethnicity, political opinions, gender identity, sexual orientation, nationality, etc.

In France, discrimination also includes differences in treatment based on surname, ability to express oneself in French or not, physical appearance, place of residence, loss of autonomy, the fact of being a beneficiary of the Complémentaire Santé Solidaire (ex CMU-C) or Aide Médicale d'Etat, and so on.


'''Medical ethics prohibit all discrimination, but this does not mean that any selection of populations is discrimination''.

Hippocratic Oath: "My first concern will be to restore, preserve or promote health in all its elements, physical and mental, individual and social. I will respect all persons (...) without any discrimination according to their condition or beliefs".

Public Health Code: health professionals must "listen to, examine, advise or treat all persons with the same conscience, regardless of their origin, morals or family situation, their membership or non-membership of a particular ethnic group, nation or religion, their disability or state of health, their reputation or any feelings they may have towards them...". (Public Health Code, art. R. 4127-7)

There are cases in which it may be legitimate to make differences, even on prohibited grounds such as nationality. For example, when recommendations were put in place in 2007 for vaccination against tuberculosis aimed at specific populations (children born in a highly endemic country or whose parents are from that country), the Directorate General for Health asked the Human Rights Defender whether this constituted discrimination. His response was that this targeted health policy did not constitute discrimination, given the public health issues at stake and the proportionate nature of the proposed rules. However, she called for great vigilance to ensure that this measure was not used to monitor the residency status of the target groups.


'''Refusal of care as discrimination'''

Situations of refusal of care are situations where certain people are refused treatment simply because, for example, they have a certain socio-administrative status.

''Cas clinique''<ref>''Migration Santé Alsace, "Vers plus d'égalité en santé : guide de prévention et de lutte contre les discriminations", 2019,'' https://www.migrationssante.org/axes-dintervention/discriminations-et-sante/guide/</ref>'' :'''''Ms B., a patient of Romanian nationality, requested and obtained an appointment with a GP. On the day of the appointment, she was finally refused a consultation. The doctor gave two reasons: (1) the patient was in receipt of State Medical Aid (AME), which made it difficult for the Assurance Maladie to pay her; (2) the patient did not speak or understand French well.''  

Invited to a mediation session following a complaint to the Order by an association accompanying the patient, the doctor was reminded that it is explicitly forbidden to refuse treatment on the grounds of a particular health cover (Article 1110-3 of the Public Health Code). Furthermore, the apprehension of administrative difficulties cannot, in itself, justify refusing care. Lastly, difficulty in communicating does not justify a refusal of care in the first instance. At the very least, a clinical examination is possible. Interpreting resources can be mobilised. In this case, the refusal of care was discriminatory and unlawful.

'''Professional law and harm to individuals'''

<nowiki>Some refusals of care are legitimate: for example, a professional is obliged to refuse care requested when it does not fall within his or her remit. Health professionals may also refuse to provide care, as expressly stated in paragraph 2 of article R. 4127-47 of the French Public Health Code: "Except in an emergency or where he would lack humanity, a doctor has the right to refuse care for professional or personal reasons.[...]".</nowiki>

But in all cases, the act of refusing care cannot be to the detriment of the individual, whose right to health is affirmed by texts of high normative value (the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights of 1976, the European Social Charter of 1961 and 1996, and in France, the Preamble to the Constitution of 1946).


'''The reality of discrimination in access to healthcare in France today'''

Discrimination is difficult to measure and understand. Testing is the most widely used method for establishing the presence of a social phenomenon of discrimination, making it possible to describe differences in treatment by healthcare professionals, for equivalent clinical cases but with distinct socio-cultural variables. A major study was carried out in 2019 on the differences in access to medical appointments in France depending on whether you are eligible for CMU-C (now ACS) or are of African origin. The results highlight strong discrimination based on economic vulnerability, with explicit and direct discriminatory refusals of care for 10 to 15% of the 1,500 professionals contacted. The study also found discrimination based on origin in some regions.

This study only describes the visible part of the problem:

*Refusal of care is not always explicit and can take more insidious forms: late, unusual and abusive scheduling of an appointment, repeated and abusive referral to another practitioner or to a hospital outpatient department without a stated medical reason, refusal to draw up an estimate, non-compliance with applicable tariffs (except in cases provided for by law), refusal to waive the advance payment of costs for beneficiaries who have complied with the care pathway, etc. (CNAM, 2008, Circulaire CIR-33, "Prise en charge des réclamations et plaintes formulées par les bénéficiaires de la CMU complémentaire ou par les professionnels de santé", "Prise en charge des plaintes formulées par les bénéficiaires de la CMU complémentaire ou par les professionnels de santé"). (CNAM, 2008, Circulaire CIR-33, "Prise en charge des réclamations et plaintes formulées par les bénéficiaires de la CMU complémentaire ou par les professionnels de santé").
*Complaints about discriminatory treatment are rare, due to the difficulty of establishing the facts, particularly when they are not direct and explicit, and because the appeal bodies (CPAM, defender of rights, professional order, etc.) are often unknown and difficult to access.

'''Psycho-social mechanisms: stereotypes and prejudice'''

Testing can reveal discriminatory behaviour that becomes visible on a large scale. It does not, however, make it possible to establish discriminatory "intent". But for the sociologist interested in understanding discrimination phenomena in all their social dimensions, discrimination is a structural rather than an individual phenomenon, and has real consequences, in particular by producing new inequalities beyond those on which it is based.

For example, a racist or homophobic act suffered by a person does not simply result in verbal or physical aggression. It is part of a continuum for the person being discriminated against because of their otherness in relation to a stereotyped identity that has become the norm. All social groups have social representations that give them access to a common meaning and a grid for reading experience.

Discrimination is caused or facilitated by some of these social representations. '''Stereotypes''' are simplifying representations that are relatively rigid and not always of good quality<ref>Jean-Baptiste Légal, Sylvain Delouvée. ''Stereotypes, prejudice and discrimination''. Dunod, 2015.</ref>. A stereotype may be advantageous or disadvantageous, but it is always simplifying. We attribute such and such stereotypical traits to the group as a whole. '''Prejudices''' are preconceived opinions that are generally depreciatory about a group and predispose people to act unfavourably towards its members.


'''Labelling patients and prioritising plains'''

Because of their training, working conditions and professional cultures, doctors use categories to classify and identify patients and their problems. Categorising people or situations in this way saves time in known or perceived situations, or in emergency situations. But categorising or labelling can lead to discrimination. Some labels that are very widespread and seem harmless ("shrink", "CMU patient" etc.) carry only simplifying connotations. Under no circumstances is their use based on validated scientific knowledge.

''Cas clinique''<ref>''Migration Santé Alsace, "Vers plus d'égalité en santé : guide de prévention et de lutte contre les discriminations", 2019,'' https://www.migrationssante.org/axes-dintervention/discriminations-et-sante/guide/</ref>'': Mrs R., the daughter of a couple of Iranian nationality, complained of severe pain during childbirth. The midwife told one of her colleagues "not to worry, that the patient's culture had to be taken into account and that it was a 'Mediterranean syndrome'". But the patient was in the process of developing a serious complication''.

You might think that the professional was trying, in all benevolence, to take account of the culture of origin and adapt her care to the individual. However, this "Mediterranean syndrome" has no scientific basis. The ways in which pain is expressed vary both within and between cultural groups, and a person's geographical origin is not predictive of the way in which they will express their complaints<ref>Myriam Dergham, Rodolphe Charles, Le "syndrome méditerranéen" : une stigmatisation par catégorisation des conduites de maladies, Medecine, volume 16, number 10, December 2020</ref>.

The use of a "culturalist" analysis grid, and therefore of stereotypes, can lead to discrimination, unbeknownst to professionals. It should also be borne in mind that healthcare professionals themselves come from a particular social background. They will therefore be more likely to understand patient signals with which they are familiar.


'''Socio-historical mechanisms of discrimination'''

Discrimination is not only direct and conscious, it can also be indirect and systemic.

*Discrimination primarily affects vulnerable populations, i.e. "subgroups of the general population which, because of social, economic, historical, political or geographical factors, are exposed to greater risks and are therefore likely to be disadvantaged in terms of their state of health and/or their access to care"<ref>Frohlich, K.L. and Potvin, L. (2008) Transcending the known in public health practice, the inequality paradox, the population approach and vulnerable populations. American Journal of Public Health, 98, 216-221. doi:10.2105/AJPH.2007.114777</ref>.
*Discrimination (on the basis of origin, place of residence, gender, age) exists in access to housing, employment, leisure activities, etc. This discrimination itself has an adverse effect on the quality of life. This discrimination itself has an adverse effect on health (social determinants of health). So there are forms of discrimination that do not fall within the field of health, but which nonetheless affect people's health.
*Finally, discrimination must be linked to social policies. Making access to certain rights more difficult, for example by tightening the conditions for obtaining a residence permit or restricting access to certain social benefits, reinforces inequalities in health. Paradoxically, certain policies that aim more specifically to give the most disadvantaged groups access to healthcare or rights can have the perverse effect of targeting these groups, and thereby stigmatising them.