{{knowledge objective
|Identifiant=OIC-021-01-A
|Item_parent=Measurement of population health status
|Item_parent_short=Measurement of population health status
|Rank=A
|Intitle=Know the definition of health and demographic indicators, life expectancy, health expectancy
|Description=Definition, objective/types/limits and achievements
|Rubric=Definition
|Contributors=Loïc Josseran
|Order=1}}

<Definition: an indicator is used to assess the health of a population. Indicators are quantitative variables that measure different aspects of a population's state of health.

A health indicator must have the following properties:

- validity'': ability to measure the predicted state of health correctly;

- sensitivity to change'': ability to report variations in health status;

- reliability'' (or ''reproducibility''): the ability to produce identical results in identical situations (inter-regional or international comparisons).


Objectives: to adapt the health and social organisation of a defined area and meet the needs of the population. The indicators must enable :

- describe, quantify and monitor the state of health of the population;

- to "compare" this state of health (in time or space);

- evaluate the impact of public health policies and initiatives.


Types: a distinction must be made between socio''demographic'' indicators, describing population trends (life expectancy and its various variations, birth rate and fertility indicators, age structures), and ''epidemiological'' indicators (mortality, morbidity).


Limitations: A single health indicator cannot sum up a health situation in its entirety. It is therefore necessary to have "several" indicators and to interpret them together.

Mortality indicators (describing the causes of death) provide little information on non-lethal pathologies and on the social, economic or quality of life impact of chronic pathologies.

In addition, the weight of deaths in the elderly population makes the overall mortality rate of little use in accounting for mortality in the younger population.

On the other hand, morbidity indicators only partially reflect the impact of diseases, particularly their functional repercussions (incapacity, disability) or in terms of quality of life.


Life expectancy at birth (or age 0) represents the average lifespan of a fictitious generation subject to the mortality conditions of the year of birth. It is calculated separately for men and women. The differences observed reflect a difference in longevity between the two sexes.

Health expectations

Given the trend in life expectancy, it is important to consider the "state of health" of the population at extreme ages.

That's why, in addition to these purely quantitative indicators, there is a version of life expectancy that includes a "qualitative approach: health expectancy".

This is a family of indicators corresponding to the number of years that people can expect to live in a given state of health, given their current living conditions. There are as many health expectancy indicators as there are measures of health (illness, disability, perceived health, etc.).

They can be calculated according to gender and at different ages in life. Calculated on a regular basis, health expectancies make it possible to estimate changes in a population's state of health as life expectancy increases. They indicate whether the years of life gained are years of life in good or poor health.