{{knowledge objective
|Identifiant=OIC-009-10-B
|Item_parent=Introduction to medical ethics
|Item_parent_short=Introduction to medical ethics
|Rank=B
|Title=Principles and aims of personal protection measures
|Description=Understand that legal protection measures are introduced and implemented with respect for individual freedoms, rights and dignity, and that their purpose is to protect the interests of the protected person.
|Rubric=Definition
|Contributors=Anne-Laurence Penchaud
|Order=10}} Illness, disability or accident can alter a person's intellectual or physical faculties and prevent them from expressing their wishes and defending their interests alone [[Principles and purposes of measures to protect people OIC-009-10-B#sdfootnote1sym|<sup>1</sup>]]. This person may be placed under a legal protection measure, which consists of appointing another person to assist or represent them in their interests. This measure must be proportionate and individualised, and must be introduced and implemented with respect for the protected person's freedoms, rights and dignity.

The 2007 law reforming the legal protection of adults strengthened the fundamental rights of protected persons. For example, the person concerned must be heard during the procedure for placing them under guardianship. The 2019 Act also strengthened the rights of protected adults, by promoting their autonomy wherever possible. Protected persons must receive from the person in charge of their protection measure, in a manner appropriate to their condition, all information concerning them [[Principles and purposes of personal protection measures OIC-009-10-B#sdfootnote2sym|<sup>2</sup>]].

'''Protection of persons of full age''' :

A person who has reached the age of majority is legally considered to be capable of carrying out all acts of civil life.

However, a legal protection measure may be put in place when a person finds it impossible to look after his or her own interests, due to a medically certified impairment of his or her mental and/or physical faculties.

People can anticipate their loss of autonomy by drawing up a future protection mandate. This enables people to choose in advance who will be responsible for protecting their interests when they are no longer able to do so.

'''Protection of minors:''''

A minor child may be placed under guardianship, whereby a person helps to protect the child's interests. Guardianship is opened when the holders of parental authority (the child's parents) can no longer exercise it (because the child has no parents, they are deceased, or their parental authority has been withdrawn).

'''Protecting people with disabilities:''''

Parents can take steps to protect the interests of their child (minor or adult) with a disability when they are no longer able to do so.

This protective measure begins when the parents die or are no longer able to care for their child.

If the child is a minor, the parents can apply for guardianship of minors to protect his or her interests. If the child is of full age, they can use the future protection mandate.

'''Rights of protected patients of full age:'''

'''''The rights of adult patients under court protection and guardianship:'''''

Adults under court protection or guardianship exercise their rights personally and receive information relating to their state of health directly. The curator may only receive this information from the doctor if the protected person authorises him to do so.

Like any other patient, a protected adult must personally consent to the medical procedure under consideration. Consent may be withdrawn at any time and refusal must be respected, except in emergencies.

Medical records are released at the patient's request, using the same procedure as for other adults.

'''''The rights of adult patients under guardianship:'''''

Medical information is given to the guardian. Once the guardian has access to information about the protected person's health, he or she must respect medical confidentiality. However, the adult under guardianship has the right to receive the information directly and to participate in the decision-making process concerning him or her. This information and this participation in the decision will then be adapted to the faculties of the protected person.

The consent of adults under guardianship must be systematically sought if they are able to express their wishes and participate in decisions concerning them. Consent may be revoked at any time. The consent of the legal representative alone must remain exceptional. In addition, except in emergencies, the guardian may not, without the judge's authorisation, take a decision that would seriously affect the integrity of the protected person or the privacy of his or her private life. Lastly, the doctor has the right to provide essential care if the guardian refuses, which could have serious consequences for the health of the protected adult.

In a guardianship situation, in principle, the medical file cannot be communicated to the protected person, but only to the guardian as his legal representative. However, it is the guardian's responsibility, as far as possible, to inform the protected adult of the contents of the medical file.


[Principles and purposes of personal protection measures OIC-009-10-B#sdfootnote1anc|1]] This text borrows from several documents published by the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of Solidarity, Autonomy and the Disabled and the Ministry of Health and Prevention, and from consultations on justice.fr, solidarités-santé.gouv.fr, service-public.fr.

[Principles and purposes of personal protection measures OIC-009-10-B#sdfootnote2anc|2]] For further information, consult the "Charter of rights and freedoms of protected adults".