{{knowledge objective
|Identifiant=OIC-009-12-B
|Item_parent=Introduction to medical ethics
|Item_parent_short=Introduction to medical ethics
|Rank=B
|Intitle=Knowing the elements of the procedures for implementing these protection measures or protection mandates
|Description=To know :
 the roles of the various parties involved in implementing a protective measure,
 the procedures for appointing a curator or guardian,
 the different types of guardianship (simple/reinforced/adjusted)
 The characteristics of family habilitation or a future protection mandate
 The conditions for terminating guardianship, curatorship or safeguard of justice measures.
|Rubric=Support
|Contributors=Anne-Laurence Penchaud
|Ordre=12}}'''La mise en place d'une mesure de protection''[[To know the elements of the procedures for the implementation of these protective measures or mandate of protection OIC-009-12-B#sdfootnote1sym|<sup>1</sup>]] '''

The applicant for a protective measure may be :

- the adult concerned

- their spouse (husband, partner, etc.), a relative or a person with whom the adult has a "close and stable relationship" (e.g. close friend)

- the person already exercising a legal protection measure in respect of the adult concerned (his/her guardian or curator)

- the public prosecutor, on his or her own initiative or at the request of a third party (who may be the attending physician or hospital doctor, or a social service).

The application (or request) must be submitted or sent to the clerk's office of the guardianship judge in the place of habitual residence of the person to be protected. The application is made using a form that is easily accessible on Service-public.fr

'''The issue of a detailed medical certificate:'''

Any request to the guardianship judge to open a protection measure must be accompanied by a medical certificate describing any impairment of the person's faculties and the foreseeable evolution, and specifying the consequences of this impairment on the need for assistance or representation.

The certificate must be drawn up by a doctor chosen from a list drawn up by the public prosecutor. Recently, the doctor drawing up the certificate has been able to request the opinion of the person's GP.

'''Investigation of the request:'''

It is the guardianship judge who decides whether an adult should benefit from a protective measure. To do this, the judge will hold a hearing with the person to be protected, who may be assisted by a lawyer or accompanied, subject to the judge's agreement, by any person of his or her choice. The hearing may also be attended by the protected person's GP.

The judge will automatically hear the person who filed the application for protection.

'''Appointment of curator or guardian:'''

The judge appoints one or more tutors or curators.

The tutor or curator is chosen first and foremost from among the relatives of the person to be protected. If this is not possible, the judge will appoint a professional, known as a legal representative for the protection of adults.

Both guardianship and curatorship can be divided between a guardian (or curator) responsible for the protection of the person (for example, in the event of marriage) and a guardian (curator) responsible for the management of assets (for example, to make tax returns).

'''The different types of curatorship:'''

There are three types of guardianship (simple, strengthened and adjusted), which restrict to a greater or lesser extent the acts that the person to be protected can carry out, in order to meet the needs of the person to be protected as closely as possible.

'''L'habilitation familiale et le mandat de protection future :'''

Family authorisation allows a close relative (parent, child, grandparent, brother, sister, spouse, cohabitee, PACS partner) to represent a person. This authorisation is given by the judge when the person is unable to express his or her wishes on a day-to-day basis, or to perform or understand acts of daily life. It may be general or limited to certain acts. Entitlement enables the person representing the person to act on their behalf. The empowered person carries out his or her duties free of charge.

The future protection mandate allows any adult to designate in advance one or more persons (called a mandatary) to represent him or her on the day when he or she is no longer able to manage his or her interests.

'''Conditions for the termination of guardianship, curatorship or safeguard of justice measures:'''

A protective measure is terminated either by the death of the protected person or by a court decision to terminate the measure, noting that the causes that gave rise to the measure no longer exist.

The person concerned is released if their state of health improves.

The judge may decide to terminate the protection ex officio, and the persons who may apply for termination are the same as those who may apply for protection.

As with the application for protection, the judge's decision is based on a detailed, up-to-date medical certificate, which may be issued by the attending physician or another physician, and after hearing the person concerned and their guardian or curator.

The improvement or deterioration of the protected adult's situation always makes it possible to modify the protection regime''',''' in the sense of a reduction, a reinforcement (curatorship can be transformed into guardianship) or a change in its mode of exercise.



[This text is based on several documents published by the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of Solidarity, Autonomy and the Disabled and the Ministry of Health and Prevention, as well as consultations on justice.fr, solidarités-santé.gouv.fr and service-public.fr.