{{knowledge objective
|Identifiant=OIC-009-05-A
|Item_parent=Introduction to medical ethics
|Item_parent_short=Introduction to medical ethics
|Rank=A
|Title=Respect for autonomy
|Description=To understand the ethical foundations and legal provisions relating to respect for patients' autonomy and consent to care. To be familiar with the law of 4 March 2002 on the rights of patients, the principle of respect for patients' wishes and the concept of free and informed consent.
|Rubrique=Definition
|Contributors=Guillaume Grandazzi, Mylène Gouriot, Grégoire Moutel
|Order=5}} '''I. Autonomy, information and consent'''

Today, as a result of the democratisation of our healthcare system and patients' desire to share access to medical knowledge, their demand to participate in the care process is growing, raising the question of the need to provide them with quality information, to obtain their consent and therefore to respect their freedom of choice. As a result, medical practice has become a field in which respect for patient autonomy is now central, through patient participation in the decisions that concern them, recognised as a right (when this is not made impossible by a state of great vulnerability, an emergency or a loss of psychological autonomy linked to the illness).

The principle of autonomy stems philosophically from the period of so-called modern philosophy in the 17th century, which prefigured the philosophy of the Enlightenment in the 18th century. In his Discourse on Method, Descartes asserted the sovereignty of the mind over the body. This is the condition of freedom. This condition, which enables every person to judge what is right or good for them, is based on the act of the mind. The subject's autonomy can then be understood as the individual freedom to have singular preferences through internal deliberation based on a capacity for analysis. In the sense of Jean Jacques Rousseau, this translates into a social contract, where individuals acquire rights within the framework of the common law, these rights allowing freedom of thought, freedom of belief and freedom to choose one's destiny.

In the field of healthcare, the application of such an area of patient freedom has historically been ignored. For a very long time, medical decisions were taken without the patient's consent, or even without informing him or her.  This attitude was described as paternalistic, and since the 1970s there has been a legitimate demand to involve patients in the choices that concern them. According to Nilstum's definition, paternalism consisted of treating others in accordance with what was considered to be the good of others, rarely subordinating to this good any preferences, whether expressed or not, of these others. In clinical practice today, recognition of patient autonomy is reflected in a shared construction of the medical decision. This approach is commonly referred to as the co-decision process. It is based on the recognition of autonomy and is developed through an approach that now requires healthcare providers to inform and take into account the patient's questions, wishes and values.

This autonomy must be recognised, but sometimes it cannot be considered an absolute, either because the patient is losing his autonomy and therefore his ability to analyse and make decisions, or because the demands he might make in the name of his freedom cannot be reconciled with the values or organisation of our healthcare system or our society.

Prior to any diagnostic or therapeutic approach, respect for patient autonomy must be reflected in a duty to provide information before obtaining consent. Consent that is not preceded by high-quality information is not legitimate.

This respect for patient autonomy has been enshrined in French legislation, first in a law governing biomedical research in 1988, and then in the bioethics laws since 1994. These laws address the issue of information and consent in specific cases, such as biomedical research, organ donation, medically assisted procreation and genetic testing, all areas in which information and consent must be given and collected in writing. Then, in 2002, the law on patients' rights and the quality of the healthcare system, known as the law of 4 March 2002, recognised the right to information and consent in all healthcare practices.

Patients need, and have the right, to be informed about the choice of examinations or treatments that concern them first and foremost in their body and in their experience, because they concern their life and their conception of it. Patients should be provided with all the information they need to make their own choices, as it is ultimately up to them to decide whether or not to exercise their autonomy.

At the heart of these developments lies the way in which patients are informed. This issue is unquestionably at the heart of the notion of professional responsibility and the way in which we conceive of a patient's autonomy. The more complete the information provided, including all the uncertainties and doubts, the more the professional reinforces the patient's autonomy of decision, even if this means making the path to the patient's choice more complex. So providing information is not neutral.

The information process relies on the patient's ability to understand the medical discourse. Here we can really talk about "understanding", in the etymological sense of the term: the patient "takes with him" the information he is given, confronts it with his own experiences and fears, and gives a picture of his illness with which he can live and which will form the basis of his dialogue with the doctor.

The duty to inform therefore covers two levels:

- the first is ethical, where patient autonomy in the healthcare relationship is increasingly recognised and promoted as the democratic basis for respecting and protecting individuals;

- the second is of a legal nature, resulting in the obligation to provide high-quality information to enable patients to accept or refuse treatment in an informed manner.

In practice, as far as the form of information is concerned, it should above all be given orally by the healthcare professional, who should take the time necessary to ensure that each patient understands it properly, depending on their condition and difficulties. This can be helped by providing the patient with appropriate educational documents. Apart from the specific cases provided for by law (organ donation in the case of a living person, biomedical research, genetic studies, medically assisted procreation, refusal of care, etc.), the information document is not a document intended to collect signed written consent. Its sole purpose is to provide patients with information that will enable them to come back to it once they have returned to their room or home and to ask any questions they may have.

To achieve this, quality information must meet a number of objectives:

   - ensure that information is provided in accordance with the principles of transparency and integrity, based on current scientific and medical data;

   - inform the patient about the benefits and risks, based on validated data and, where appropriate, setting out the areas of uncertainty;

   - Over and above the benefits and risks, shed light on :

   - the course of care,

   - physical and psychological inconvenience in everyday life,

   - the organisation of the care pathway over time and the organisational constraints involved,

   - the social rights of the sick person and the help and support available if necessary;

   - participate in the choice between two or more medical approaches when they are validated alternatives compatible with the patient's situation.


      II. Refusal of care''

Ethical debate about refusing care is fairly frequent within teams, and sometimes the concept of autonomy on which the patient's attitude is based raises questions. A patient's refusal to accept care can offend carers who have been trained to think of their actions in terms of an essential value of care: acting on behalf of others, sometimes in their place, in the name of beneficence. Sometimes, the teams are confronted with situations where refusal appears contrary not only to medical logic, but also to what they consider to be the best interests of the patient. In other circumstances, however, the patient's refusal of care will be in line with the medical team's opinion. This will be the case at the end of life, when the patient asks for care to be limited or discontinued to avoid unreasonable obstinacy; this falls within the scope of the so-called Claeys-Léonetti law on the end of life, which authorises such procedures.

Refusal of care raises questions about the concept of autonomy.  The clinical context can generate or reveal a loss of autonomy, well beyond the major cases of geriatrics or psychiatry. This raises two questions:

- Trying to determine whether or not the patient's formulation of a refusal is an act of will, based on a capacity for deliberative autonomy, including receiving and understanding information about the nature of the medical proposal and all the consequences of its implementation, but also of its non-implementation.

- Consider whether the patient's word should be accepted as such or not.

If the patient's words are accepted outright, it is because they are considered to be an acceptable choice (often because the clinical situation and the medical assessment are in line with the wishes expressed by the patient). On the other hand, a patient's refusal may give rise to a care attitude aimed at giving time and not accepting the refusal de facto; this time is then used to provide explanations and discuss the matter again with the patient.

Accepting a refusal of care too easily would be tantamount to denying the dimension of nursing work which is the accompaniment towards acceptance and a shared decision. In many clinical situations, refusal of care is simply a point of call or a clinical sign of psychological deficiency, suffering or despair, all of which it is the mission of medicine to combat so that the patient can get better and live better. The ethical question, then, is how far we are entitled to go in this process, between explaining and convincing, without forcing. In all cases, the question of time is important, because assessing these situations requires a relationship with others and regular, in-depth exchanges between people, which are essential in view of the consequences of the decisions to be taken.

In this context, medicine finds itself at the heart of an expertise that can guide the fate of individuals. The aim is to analyse the individual's ability to exercise an autonomy that is deemed valid: a formidable task! In practice, a medical team explores a certain number of abilities:

- That the patient understands and integrates the information and understands the consequences of attitudes on his or her life,

- That the subject is endowed with memory (that he can remember) and that he is capable of making a decision, sticking to it and voluntarily maintaining his decision (in the sense of maintaining a will by using reason).

In clinical terms, this assessment leads to a gradient of situations ranging from major impairment to minor impairment. The question then arises as to what weight each 'non-autonomy' should have in order to accept or not accept that medical teams go beyond the patient's wishes. A reading of the arguments in the ethics of decision making suggests that, in certain situations, the medical decision will be based above all on beneficence, particularly in situations of impaired autonomy. Once this has been established, in order to act in this way we need to consider the grounds for acting against the opinion expressed by the patient:

- The concept of expected benefit (or expected improvement), which is the result of a benefit/risk assessment;

- Implementing an approach that excludes physical violence that is traumatic for the patient and the team;

- Maintaining a relationship that upholds the patient's dignity.

Given the complexity of this type of decision for a doctor, a carer and an entire team, it is customary to advocate a three-stage medical decision based on the principle of collegiality:

a) The time that precedes, and enables the case to be investigated, as in a court of law, in a collegial manner within the framework of an ethic of discussion; this time can be long, and reserves a space for argumentation between a normative level of knowledge and the decision-making level adapted to reality, i.e. to the patient's individual situation. In this context, individual decisions by a single professional should be avoided;

b) The time when the decision must be taken by a clearly designated individual, driven by an "intimate collective conviction". Validation of the principles of beneficence, non-maleficence and justice must guide this conviction;

c) The time after the decision, when it is imperative to continue the discussion in order to take responsibility for and monitor developments, to continue or to reconsider.

This time must be respected and valued in the organisation of care teams.

But there are situations in which refusing care can be resisted or refused.

First of all, we should mention the particular situation of an immediate life-threatening emergency, where the patient may have expressed a refusal of care verbally or, even more so, in writing, even though he or she was not in an end-of-life situation. The classic example is the suicidal patient. There is now a consensus that, in this case, as long as medical action can be taken, it should be, since there is a life-threatening emergency accompanied by impaired discernment.

Thus, except in an end-of-life situation where the patient has made his or her choice known orally or via advance directives (living will) or via the trusted support person, the prevailing idea in an emergency situation is that the person should be saved.

This is easily illustrated, for example, by the case of a young diabetic teenager who, refusing to continue insulin therapy because of a family conflict, ended up in an acid-ketotic coma with a life-threatening prognosis. In an extreme conception of respect for autonomy, we could choose, in all cases, to defer to the patient's choice; But accepting a refusal of care too easily and without debate or questioning would mean denying situations where a patient's verbalisation does not necessarily reflect the complexity of his or her thinking, or even means a cry for help, a request to be listened to differently, for a different way of providing care - all situations where the care provider's job must be to connect the patient to a care approach that is better adapted to his or her situation and which, in the end, will be positive for him or her.

There is also a final case of refusal of care: that which exposes the other person or raises questions in terms of public health.

Many situations fall into this category: Opposition to vaccinations; refusal to accept prophylactic treatment for meningitis or anti-tuberculosis treatment which may increase the risk to the community, a family or a spouse; refusal of a medically justified caesarean section, which puts the life of the mother or even the child at risk; refusal of an essential transfusion which involves a risk of after-effects, disability or death... In these cases, there is a real conflict of values, with healthcare professionals asserting their decisions on the basis that medical practice cannot be degraded, especially when other interests are at stake beyond the patient's (an unborn child, a family or the community).

There is also a need for medicine to prevent, treat and provide assistance in a way that is based on the public good, and not on formal respect for individual convictions by which patients mark their differences with the community, possibly to the detriment of themselves and others. An autonomist, individualist approach would legitimise the refusal of vaccinations (although beneficial to the community as a whole, it loses its meaning if not everyone agrees to it), the refusal of a caesarean section because of a mother's choice (to the detriment of the child), the refusal to save the father or mother of a child in the name of a belief or religion (certainly putting at risk the balance of the family but also collective solidarity with those who remain dependent), the refusal of care during serious epidemics (putting at risk the lives of other people), etc.

Thus, in a universal understanding of medicine, it is difficult to see patients as having rights but no duties. An autonomist view, taken to the extreme, would respect these endangerments, regarding them as a right and placing the patient in the position of a user, or even a client, imposing his or her choices on the healthcare professional, who is then seen as a service provider. Our analysis should be set against the writings of Hans Georg Gadamer in Philosophy of Health, where he reminds us that the ethics of responsibility can thwart individual convictions, and that the common good is at stake. In the light of his analysis, a healthcare system must be able to define rules and duties applicable to all; in return, everyone receives rights: social protection, equal access to care. What would we say about a system that allowed air travellers to object, on individual grounds, to the landing rules and instruments applied by an airline pilot? If health were to become a simple matter of consumerism governed by such individual choices, far removed from the complex notions we have just set out and the representations of the social bond, then the ethical aim of medicine would have to be redefined. We would then have to ask ourselves whether it would not then be contrary to the ethical aim defined by Paul Ricoeur as "the aim of the good life, with and for others, in just institutions".