{{knowledge objective
|Identifiant=OIC-009-02-A
|Item_parent=Introduction to medical ethics
|Item_parent_short=Introduction to medical ethics
|Rank=A
|Intitle=Knowing the definition of bioethics
|Description=A field of philosophical research, public debate and legal rules concerning the ethics of research, the development and use of techniques in the life sciences and the field of health, and biomedical practices.
|Rubric=Definition
|Contributors=Guillaume Grandazzi, Mylène Gouriot, Grégoire Moutel
|Order=2}}



The emergence of bioethics in the second half of the 20th century was part of a wider movement to question science and technology, our increasing capacity for action and the new dimensions of our responsibility.

V.R. Potter, the biologist and cancer specialist who 'coined' the term bioethics in the early 1970s, saw it as "a global ethic for the survival of human beings and the planet". He wanted to see an alliance between the biological sciences and ethics, between science and the humanities, and social control of scientific knowledge and progress.

However, the creation in 1971 of the Kennedy Institute of Ethics at Georgetown University in the United States restricted bioethics to the medical field. The American sociologist R. Fox has identified three stages in the development of bioethics. In the 1960s, bioethics first became part of a growing awareness of the problems involved (medical experimentation, resuscitation and organ transplants, etc.), and religious figures entered the field. In the 1970s, jurists and philosophers secularised the debate and contributed to the development of regulatory frameworks: the need for rational, argumentative debate and the recognition of fundamental principles came to the fore. In the 90s, economic issues and concerns became part of the debate, and the stakes of justice became increasingly important in a context of increasingly constrained resources.

In recent decades, the questions raised by medical progress (procreation, genetics, predictive medicine, neuroscience, artificial intelligence, etc.) have increasingly concerned the definition and future of our humanity. For example, the slogan of the 2018 Bioethics Forum was "What kind of world do we want for tomorrow?

Contemporary developments in medicine have shifted the boundaries of therapeutic intervention: upstream of the disease (screening, prevention, procreation, etc.) and downstream (end of life, resuscitation, organ transplants, etc.). In most of these areas, the challenges are as much, if not more, societal than medical! Medical intervention at the frontiers of life increases the scope of our collective responsibility and transforms medical practices into societal problems with high moral stakes (who should be born and die, and under what conditions?). The questions raised by these practices must therefore be discussed in a rational and pluralist way.

The globalisation of Western biomedicine is also globalising the ethical issues associated with its development. In 2005, UNESCO published a "Universal Declaration on Bioethics and Human Rights", and in 2015 a book entitled "Why Global Bioethics? In 2005, the World Medical Association published a "Handbook of Medical Ethics" for "physicians and medical students worldwide".

Bioethics should therefore follow the development of biomedicine throughout the world and establish itself as a model. But it is Western values that we are trying to disseminate internationally - certain conceptions of illness, life and death, or principles such as autonomy - in very different socio-cultural contexts. Is a global or universal bioethics possible without becoming the imposition of a dominant way of thinking?

Today, contrary to V.R. Potter's vision, bioethics is a sub-set of health ethics; it concerns the issues raised by the emergence of new biotechnologies and the questions raised by the application of these scientific advances to humans. The aim of bioethics is to explore the issues raised by the development and application of biomedical technologies, and to analyse the transition between what is possible and what should be.