{{knowledge objective
|Identifiant=OIC-009-08-A
|Item_parent=Introduction to medical ethics
|Item_parent_short=Introduction to medical ethics
|Rank=A
|Title=Person of trust
|Description=To understand the role of the trusted support person in providing information and obtaining consent. To be familiar with the conditions for their appointment and their roles.
|Rubric=Management
|Contributors=Guillaume Grandazzi, Mylène Gouriot, Grégoire Moutel
|Order=8}}The right to appoint a trusted support person is enshrined in article L.1111-6 of the CSP (public health code). For a long time, healthcare teams have been concerned to see how a person close to the patient, as a third party and mediator, can help to build links in the care process and give the patient a voice, particularly when the patient is unable or unwilling to take part in the decision alone. This reflection led to the introduction of the concept of the "trusted support person" in the "health democracy" law of 4 March 2002.

The role of the trusted support person, in the original sense of the term, is to assist the patient in his or her care, to support him or her physically and/or psychologically, and to liaise with the medical teams, once the patient has designated one (a designation that allows the confidentiality of information to be shared). In other words, they support the patient's day-to-day care, choices and decisions.

This primary role deserves to be emphasised because, sometimes, the trusted support person is still seen only as an interlocutor in major crisis situations, such as, for example, stopping or limiting care at the end of life or the question of post-mortem organ removal; situations in which the trusted support person is called upon to testify to the patient's wishes. The role of the trusted support person is an important one.

Even outside the hospital setting, anyone being cared for in our healthcare system may feel the need to be accompanied by someone close to them, regardless of the status of their illness (whether in the case of severe illnesses or "ordinary", everyday illnesses). In addition, any citizen, even if they are not ill, who receives a healthcare service (e.g. screening, preventive action, blood tests, X-rays, etc.), may also wish to be accompanied by someone. Finally, anyone can accidentally find themselves in a situation where they are faced with a complex end-of-life decision. From a more collective point of view, we should therefore offer this possibility of designation to all citizens, as soon as they meet their doctor, insofar as the law provides for the trusted support person to be consulted to testify to the subject's wishes, to find out a person's wishes regarding a decision to stop or limit life-sustaining treatment or the question of post-mortem organ removal, all situations that can arise accidentally independently of an illness.

The appointment of a trusted support person must therefore be extended beyond the context of severe pathologies and hospitalisation alone, to become a civic option, available to everyone in the general population, regardless of their clinical condition. In practice, patients and their families are not necessarily familiar with this procedure. It is the duty of every healthcare provider and every healthcare institution to offer it.

The first thing to do is to explain that any adult relative can be a trusted support person: brother, sister, parent, grandparent, uncle, aunt, spouse, partner, friend, member of an association, etc. You should explain to the patient the purpose of this appointment, while also explaining that it is not compulsory. It is a possibility that patients must be able to choose (accept or refuse if they feel neither the need nor the desire to do so), especially if they wish to keep the secret completely, or if they wish to protect all those close to them and keep their illness a secret.

In previous years, it has been observed that designated trusted third parties were sometimes unaware that they had been chosen by a patient, as they were not present and not involved in the designation process; this raised doubts about their legitimacy to subsequently participate in an ethical discussion concerning the patient. This is why, from now on, the designation, made in writing by the patient, must be co-signed by the designated person. The procedure for designating and collecting information from the trusted support person must therefore be properly organised, ensuring that there is a reference person within the healthcare team responsible for informing the patient and then the designated person.

The role of the carer is to advise the patient on the basis of his or her experience of the illness and the sometimes complex family or emotional environment. It is important to explain that both designation and non-designation are perfectly legitimate choices. This is why the Public Health Code stipulates that there is an obligation to propose a trusted support person, but not an obligation to designate one. Giving patients this freedom and guiding them in their best interests is an ethical responsibility. When explanations are given, the question of breaking confidentiality with regard to the designated relative should be discussed (how far does the patient wish to go with regard to confidences, at what point, etc.).

With regard to the persons designated, several important points will be raised, in particular their availability and their willingness to carry out this mission, which are essential to give meaning to the process. An explanation of how long the designation of a trusted support person is valid will be given: the law does not set a limit on the validity of the designation made. However, the ups and downs of life and the way a patient's experience of illness evolves mean that things can evolve and change over time. The spirit of the law and the legitimate variability of a person's choices mean that the patient should be informed of the possible change of designated person. The designation can be revoked at any time by the patient. For healthcare professionals, the recommendation is that the patient should be asked each time he or she is admitted to hospital again, or each time he or she undergoes a new cycle of care, whether the designated person will remain in place.

In fine, the designation should be made in writing, signed by the patient and the designated person, and recorded in the medical record, with precise contact details and the nature of the relationship between the patient and the designated person, including any updates.