{{knowledge objective
|Identifiant=OIC-009-15-B
|Item_parent=Introduction to medical ethics
|Item_parent_short=Introduction to medical ethics
|Rank=B
|Title= Prenatal diagnosis
|Description=To understand the legal provisions governing prenatal diagnosis
 To be familiar with the ethical principles governing the use of prenatal diagnosis
 To be familiar with the regulatory principles governing the operation of prenatal diagnosis centres.
|Rubrique=Management
|Contributors=
|Order=15}}Understanding the ethical issues involved in PGD in the context of prenatal diagnosis: women, couples and professionals faced with complex choices

== A. Ethics and prenatal diagnosis (PND) ==
Prenatal diagnosis (PND) was defined by the Bioethics Act of 29 July 1994 as all "medical practices aimed at detecting a particularly serious condition in the embryo or foetus in utero". This activity is carried out under the supervision of the Agence de biomédecine, a public body created by the law of 6 August 2004.

Its main tools are ultrasound and the study of foetal DNA and/or the foetal karyotype following invasive sampling (choriocentesis, amniocentesis or cordocentesis). Faced with the fear that these techniques could be used to satisfy the desire for "perfect" children, ethical considerations led the legislator to introduce a legal framework for PND in 1994 with the Bioethics Act and its successive revisions. The text of the law as it stood on 6 August 2004 specified the purpose of PND: "to prevent or treat a particularly serious condition, in the interests of the unborn child".

The application of advances in foetal imaging and human genetics to foetal medicine is highly questionable. Medical genetics initially focused on serious monogenic childhood diseases, with the discovery in 1956 of the existence of a trisomy of chromosome 21 in the cells of patients suffering from the disease then known as "mongolism". Gradually, it became possible to harvest foetal cells from pregnant women using the amniocentesis technique. This marked the birth of prenatal diagnosis, first for trisomy 21 and then rapidly for a dozen other chromosomal anomalies. The population concerned by prenatal diagnosis then expanded considerably, due in particular to the authorisation of termination of pregnancy for medical reasons (IMG) under the law of 17 January 1975, the development of ultrasound monitoring of pregnancies, the appearance of biological techniques for analysing serum markers to assess the risk of trisomy 21 and molecular biology techniques.

However, as progress in PND is much more rapid than that in therapy, recognising a disease often means realising that there is no treatment available to cure it, leading some couples to request termination of the pregnancy because of a disease that their future child will (perhaps) develop early, but also, in some cases, late after 30, 40 or 50 years.

It is then up to the CPDPN to interpret the meaning given in practice to "a particularly serious condition recognised as incurable at the time of diagnosis" (Public Health Code).

France is one of the few countries to authorise IMG "at any time during pregnancy" and the legislator, supported by the National Consultative Ethics Committee (CCNE), has never wished to draw up a list of diseases giving access to IMG, in particular to avoid automatic decision-making (which would not take account of individual situations) and the stigmatisation of a group of people. Indeed, when faced with a request for an IMG, a CPDPN cannot exclude considering the context (the history, culture, representations and convictions of each of the parents), which may lead to different decisions from one couple to another, from one CPDPN to another, for the same pathology. The law therefore leaves a great deal to be decided on a case-by-case basis, and the expression "particular seriousness" may be interpreted in different ways by different families and teams. This freedom means that the experience, sensitivity and background of each couple can be taken into account in their decision.

Today, the CPDPNs are faced with certain requests for IMGs for late-onset genetic diseases for which prevention and/or treatment may or may not exist. One example is the case of foetuses carrying the BRCA 1 gene (which increases the risk of developing breast and ovarian cancer) in families marked by numerous early deaths linked to these diseases. In these situations, requests for IMG have been deemed justified by the family history, which then becomes a criterion of "particular seriousness". However, some people question the legitimacy of certain requests.

The question underlying this whole debate is that of the criteria legitimising a medical decision to terminate a pregnancy. In the case of medical reasons relating to the preservation of the mother's life, there is little debate on this issue, as medicine gives priority to the person "present", in this case the mother. On the other hand, in the case of foetal impairment, the underlying issue is a serious one, and ties in with that of the acceptance of disability in our society. Some people, including medical practitioners, although not opposed to abortion, fear that society could slide into a situation where, because there are not enough facilities for the care of disabled children, parents would be encouraged, in an unspoken way, to resort more systematically to abortion. Another question, which is too often avoided by both medical and parental authorities, is: what quality of life can be guaranteed to people whose level of awareness and capacity for autonomy are sometimes difficult to assess?

The very terms of the law must therefore be questioned in the ethical process of deciding whether or not to terminate a pregnancy:

   - High probability": you don't have to be 100% sure that a child carrying the mutation will develop a serious disease. Some couples say they don't want to take the slightest risk. But isn't having a child already taking a risk? Others consider that a 25% risk, for example, is acceptable because it means that there is a 75% chance that their baby will be fine. So how we assess the notion of probability depends on each person and their history;

   - incurability": there may be diseases that are curable but "disabling", but behind this handicap, some people put variable notions ranging from "acceptable" to "unbearable". This involves an assessment of comfort and quality of life. Here again, incurability is a fairly subjective concept whose interpretation can vary from one individual to another;

   - Particular seriousness": the concept of seriousness also varies greatly from one person to another. What is a serious illness, and for whom? Who decides? Is it serious for the child, for his or her parents, for the doctor, for society? This question arises particularly in the case of diseases that cause intellectual impairment: systematic screening for trisomy 21 is a perfect illustration. When is an illness serious? At birth, in childhood, in adulthood or after the age of 50? How serious is a disease? When it affects a finger, a hand, the whole body, motor functions, cognitive functions? These questions illustrate the density and complexity of the discussions held within the CPDPN. Ongoing dialogue with the couple is necessary, as it is not only their perception of the seriousness of the disease that is at stake, but also their philosophy of life. This dialogue requires a great deal of time and energy on the part of multidisciplinary teams (doctor, geneticist, genetic counsellor, obstetrician, psychologist) whose main role is to support the couple as they work towards a decision.

== B. The specific case of non-invasive prenatal screening (NIPS) ==
Since 2013, a new screening test for trisomy 21 has gradually come onto the market in France. This is the non-invasive prenatal screening test (NIPT), which uses research and analysis of foetal DNA circulating in the mother's blood. By simply taking a blood sample from the pregnant woman, this test makes it possible to detect trisomy 21 at a much earlier stage (around eight to ten weeks' amenorrhoea - SA) and with a higher level of performance. The discovery of foetal DNA circulating freely in maternal plasma was described in 1997. Analysis of foetal DNA in maternal blood has already been used for many years in certain antenatal diagnostic indications, such as determining foetal sex in X-linked recessive diseases and genotyping foetal Rhesus D in Rhesus D-negative women. Until 2011, the quality of these techniques meant that they could not be reliably applied to the search for trisomy 21. Today, thanks to advances in new high-throughput sequencing techniques, the screening test for trisomy 21 based on analysis of free foetal DNA in maternal blood has a sensitivity of close to 99.9% and a specificity of 99.8% in high-risk populations.

This progress is revolutionising the practice of PND insofar as, in addition to trisomy 21, the technique is making it possible to study other characteristics of the foetal genome, with new indications and requests for prescriptions. Current debates are therefore focusing on the conditions of access to this test, not only for trisomy 21, but also for the search for other anomalies (search for risk markers potentially predictive of diseases such as cancers or other pathologies) or access to sex diagnosis.

It has been proposed that the implementation of the study of foetal DNA in maternal blood should be the subject of applied research, in the field of clinical practice, in order to gain a better understanding of the issues and perceptions of professionals and patients. The preferences of patients and professionals may differ, and the latter may be 'subjected' to the pressure of women's demands.

Will the rules for prescribing these new tests be consensual? Won't the globalisation of access to healthcare and access to e-health via the Internet mean that women will carry out tests on their own, then come back to their doctors with the results and requests for treatment? It will therefore be necessary to assess these attitudes and changes and the nature of the requests, and probably to devise new frameworks and new rules. This will undoubtedly be one of the issues at stake in the forthcoming review of the bioethics laws.

There is also the question of the impact of this development of the DPNI on requests for terminations of pregnancy. The possibility of carrying out the DPNI test before the end of the first trimester raises a fundamental question: as this test can be carried out at an early stage, even before the first trimester ultrasound, the result can also be given to the patient very quickly, i.e. before the legal term for voluntary termination of pregnancy of 16 SA (weeks of amenorrhoea), potentially allowing direct access to an abortion based, in fact, on this biological result. This development may therefore call into question the spirit of French law, which historically sought to make a clear distinction between two situations: the first, abortion (within a time limit of 16 weeks' gestation) where the woman did not wish to have a child or was unable to welcome one at that point in her life (a situation then described as maternal distress, i.e. with a psycho-social component), and the second, IMG (termination for maternal and/or foetal medical reasons), with no time limit, but currently subject to prior agreement following expertise by a CPDPN reference centre. If the results of the DPNI are communicated to the woman before 16 weeks' gestation and she requests an abortion, the ethical framework of the decision changes completely. Some couples may be tempted to have an abortion, even when the risk of illness has been judged to be low by the doctors or the potential "anomaly" to be of little seriousness.

As far as healthcare professionals are concerned, the future status of the DPNI will undoubtedly need to be clarified so that women are aware of the place it will have in the pregnancy monitoring strategy. To date, some studies show that the number of professionals who do not wish to prescribe this new test at all is low, but that there is a real debate on the legitimate indications and questions associated with its use.

== Key points
   - PND (prenatal diagnosis) is the set of medical practices designed to detect a serious condition (genetic anomaly, chromosomal abnormality or malformation) in the embryo or foetus in utero, in order to give the future parents the choice of whether or not to terminate the pregnancy and to allow better medical management of the pathology if the pregnancy is continued.

   - When a foetal anomaly is detected, it is up to the CPDPN (multidisciplinary prenatal diagnosis centre) to certify that there is a strong probability that the unborn child will suffer from a particularly serious condition that is incurable at the time of diagnosis. If the pregnant woman so decides, this certificate enables her to terminate her pregnancy on medical grounds.

The technique of non-invasive prenatal screening (NIPS) would allow selection of foetal sex or access to genetic screening for markers of pathology or risk at an early stage in pregnancy. It is easy to understand why, while supporting the emergence of NIPT, it may be necessary to target the indications carefully and possibly discuss the timing of the return of results before or after the time limit for voluntary termination of pregnancy.