{{knowledge objective
|Identifiant=OIC-009-23-A
|Item_parent=Introduction to medical ethics
|Item_parent_short=Introduction to medical ethics
|Rank=A
|Title=Organ donation
|Description=To understand the ethical issues and principles involved in organ removal and donation. Autonomy, presumed consent, anonymity, free of charge (or non-proprietary), restoration of the body, justice, role of the trusted support person, role of relatives.
|Rubrique=Definition
|Contributors=Guillaume Grandazzi, Mylène Gouriot, Grégoire Moutel
|Ordre=23}}'''Ethical and legal principles of organ donation''''

The donation of organs (heart, kidney, liver, lungs, etc.) or other elements of the human body (blood, marrow, sperm, skin, corneas, etc.) is now an essential part of life-saving medical practice.

This is a major public health need, since around 5,000 transplants are carried out every year, but there is a large waiting list (13,000 needs per year, so 8,000 patients who have not been transplanted are waiting or at risk of death).

All doctors and healthcare professionals therefore have a central role to play in raising awareness among the public, patients and families.

According to studies, public opinion has changed in recent years: 84% of French people are in favour of organ donation and agree that their organs should be removed in the event of their death.  There has been a real shift in public opinion on this subject. Agreeing to donate one's organs is now seen as a generous, altruistic gesture.

The Bioethics Laws have reinforced and developed the principles of the so-called Caillavet Law of 1976, the first law to establish organ donation in France. The current law is based on several principles:

* Removal for scientific or therapeutic purposes ;
* Respect for the human body: inviolable, not subject to property rights;
* Rules governing consent;
* Donation free of charge;
* Anonymity between donor and recipient;
* Diagnosis of death;
* Health safety of samples of human body parts (screening for transmissible diseases);
* The role of the Agence de la Biomédecine (ABM), which is responsible for managing the waiting list and allocating transplants.


'''The principles of free and anonymous donation.'''

These principles are enshrined in French law.

As Jean Rostand pointed out in 1966, attacks on the corpse will only be tolerable if they are carried out with a generous and noble intention, with positive clinical, scientific or educational ends in mind.

Yet we live in a society where free services are not taken for granted. In a strictly utilitarian economic system such as ours, many things are based on an interpretation of value in terms of money, in a market system. What's more, more and more people have to pay to go to the beach, to walk along a river, to go to the toilet, sometimes to look at a landscape. In this de facto environment, there is a risk that all human activity will be subject to the laws of the market.

Medical practice in France does not opt for the market. It chooses solidarity, based on the principle of universal access to healthcare for all, with respect for the principle of equality. What's more, we come from a philosophical tradition, stemming from the Enlightenment, which promoted the abolition of slavery, in other words the abolition of the commercialisation of people and bodies. In this way, free medical care makes it possible to prevent trafficking in human beings and organs. It also makes it possible to protect the weakest members of society, particularly in the case of living donors, so that they are not encouraged to live off the sale of their bodies. The same applies to the heirs of a deceased person, so that they cannot trade in their mortal remains.

Anonymity and secrecy "de facto" reinforce the principle of gratuity, as they prevent any contact between the donor's environment and that of the recipient. It also allows families' lives to be respected and protected (avoiding abusive claims or thanks, delicate relationship problems between the families concerned, making it easier for the donor's family to mourn, etc.).

They also ensure respect for the privacy of recipients (respect for the convalescence of a person destined to live with an organ or tissue that is foreign to their own body).

As the philosopher J. Derrida has pointed out, giving does not imply any logic of reciprocity. According to Derrida, giving without expecting to receive is an altruistic concept of total gratuitousness.


'''Concerning consent and the issues it raises.'''

Since 1976, consent has been presumed for deceased donors (anyone who has not made known their refusal to donate organs or tissues during their lifetime is considered to have consented).

However, it is now possible for deceased donors to express their refusal. This is done either through a national register of refusals, or through the testimony of relatives.

As far as the register is concerned, anyone aged 13 or over may register, without going through the intermediary of a third party. This refusal may be either to oppose samples being taken for therapeutic purposes, or for so-called scientific medical autopsy purposes, or for research purposes, but the opposition may not concern forensic autopsies (so as not to hinder the judicial process of seeking the truth). The register can also be used to specify the part or parts of the body that you do not wish to donate.

There is a special case for donations from deceased minors or adults under guardianship. In these cases, consent is obtained from the parents (each of the holders of parental authority) or the guardian.

The question of the testimony of the family and close relations was framed by a law of 7 August 2004, which specifies that the doctor must endeavour to find out from the trusted support person and close relations whether there is any opposition expressed by the deceased during his lifetime. The aim is therefore to bear witness to the wishes of the deceased, and not to formulate his opinion as a close relative. But in practice, isn't the dividing line sometimes complex?

What's more, this often raises a question on a day-to-day basis: who should be given priority in the family or among close friends? What happens in the event of disagreement? What is the hierarchy? This is why the law encourages all citizens, including those in good health, to appoint a trusted support person to act as a witness. If there is a designated trusted support person, he or she takes precedence over any other relative. Lastly, although it is not mentioned in the law, it is important to note the importance of the patient's written consent and the fact that the patient should carry a signed donor card.

This delicate issue of consent by the deceased shows the major educational and psychological role that the coordination teams responsible for taking samples and for dialogue with next of kin must play.
<br />