{{knowledge objective
|Identifiant=OIC-009-13-A
|Item_parent=Introduction to medical ethics
|Item_parent_short=Introduction to medical ethics
|Rank=A
|Title=Intentional termination of pregnancy
|Description=
|Rubric=Management
|Contributors=Nicolas Lechopier
|Ordre=13}}Voluntary interruption of pregnancy has been a recognised right in France since the 1975 Veil law. Every year, hundreds of thousands of women have recourse to it (see item 37 "Voluntary termination of pregnancy").

=== 1) This right illustrates the ethic of responsibility of the medical profession ===
Whatever the value judgement made about a woman's wish to terminate her pregnancy, or moral convictions about the value of foetal life, or views about the psychological impact of a procedure that is certainly not harmless, the 1975 law above all provided a medical framework for a practice that was both frequent and risky, as not all women were on the same footing. The law made it possible to guarantee equal and safe access to this procedure.

In other words, whether we consider that the right to abortion is a natural consequence of women's freedom, or whether we question it in terms of principles and conceptions of human life, we can agree that it is first and foremost a "public health" policy.

=== 2) This right illustrates a compromise between different moral conceptions of procreation ===
Some "pro-life" movements see abortion as the equivalent of infanticide. But when does the life of a human being begin? Only at birth? From the moment of conception? Or even before, when the plan to raise a child takes shape? Or why not even after birth, through various rites (registration, presentation to the family, baptisms, etc.)?

The question of the beginning of human life remains a contentious one, to which philosophical and religious traditions have responded in different ways, often with a degree of ambiguity. The beginning of life has always been socially negotiated (traditionally through the visible signs of pregnancy). Nor is biology able to draw a clear line on the continuum between a simple cluster of cells and a human being. Even the criterion of foetal viability depends on the context and the technical resources available.

Under these conditions, the right to abortion is a balance between consideration for the individual and respect for life. As stated in article 16 of the Civil Code, "the law ensures the primacy of the person, prohibits any attack on his dignity and guarantees respect for the human being from the beginning of his life". However, the living embryo has no legal status. The Comité Consultatif National d'Éthique describes it as a "potential human person", which makes it possible to avoid granting it rights (which would be enforceable against the woman carrying it) while still showing it consideration and respect. This compromise, developed over the last few decades, provides a balanced framework at the crossroads of different visions of the world and of human life.

=== 3) Effective access to this right is a serious ethical issue ===
In the face of various kinds of "slippery slope" arguments (e.g. that abortion would lead to eugenics), the Veil law initially introduced safeguards designed to limit excessive or abusive recourse to abortion. For example, there was a 7-day reflection period imposed on women between the first consultation for an abortion and the procedure itself. This constraint came to be seen not only as an unnecessary complication, but also as infantilising women by casting suspicion on their autonomy. During the debate that led to the vote to abolish the cooling-off period in 2017, the French Health Minister said: "The relationship with abortion has not been trivialised, it has been normalised. A woman who has made up her mind doesn't need time".

Similarly, the conscience clause that healthcare professionals can invoke is regulated. Of course, "a doctor or midwife is never obliged to carry out a voluntary interruption of pregnancy" (Article L2212-8 of the French Public Health Code). However, any professional who refuses to do so must immediately put the woman concerned in touch with other professionals. In this way, the conscience clause must not stand in the way of access to this right.

Some individuals and organisations have set themselves the goal of obstructing access to abortion by various means, for example by disseminating false information, intimidating healthcare professionals and putting pressure on healthcare establishments. The "offence of hindering abortion", which has existed since 1993, was clarified and extended in 2017, and these acts are subject to severe penalties. At the same time, initiatives have been taken by the public authorities to provide access to reliable information (toll-free number 0800 08 11 11; Official website <nowiki>https://ivg.gouv.fr/</nowiki>).

The fact remains that "effective" access to abortion for all women who want it, wherever they are, remains fragile. All the more so as the very principle of this right is far from being recognised everywhere, and is even being called into question in countries where it seemed to have been taken for granted (as the recent example of the United States has shown).