{{knowledge objective
|Identifiant=OIC-009-04-A
|Item_parent=Introduction to medical ethics
|Item_parent_short=Introduction to medical ethics
|Rank=A
|Title=Great principles of medical ethics
|Description=Know how to define and identify the principles of beneficence, non-maleficence, respect for autonomy and justice. Understand the obligations of proportionality and competence.
|Rubric=Definition
|Contributors=Guillaume Grandazzi, Mylène Gouriot, Grégoire Moutel
|Order=4}}To study ethical issues, we need tools and rules for analysis and debate.

'''<u>I. The principles approach</u>'''

The principles approach, proposed by Professors Tom L. Beauchamp and James F. Childress in 1979<ref>Tom L. Beauchamp, James F. Childress (1979). Principles of biomedical ethics. New York: Oxford University Press.</ref> in the United States, is interesting, particularly for thinking in the context of healthcare practices, and has met with great success in the medical community. The principles-based analysis approach, known as principalism, proposes the study of the ethical issues involved in a medical practice or a choice of healthcare organisation, from the angle of four major principles: beneficence, non-maleficence, respect for autonomy and justice.

'''Beneficence and non-maleficence'''

Beneficence and non-maleficence stem directly from the medical tradition. In its Hippocratic conception, the care-giver-patient relationship is based on Aristotelian morality and "Primum non nocere". Historically, medical action whose aim is to do good, by refraining from doing harm, refers to the principle of beneficence; this is a moral principle according to which what is advantageous for a patient must be achieved. This presupposes that medical action is necessarily good by nature, that a medical act is medically validated (today we would say scientifically validated) and that it has been proven in the positive sense of the term. However, as this is not always the case and the benefit/risk balance may be uncertain, the principle of beneficence must be supplemented by the principle of non-maleficence, because the risk of harming a patient may exist. It must be taken into consideration and weighed up.

'''Autonomy'''

The principle of autonomy derives from the so-called "modern" philosophy of the seventeenth century, which prefigured the Enlightenment of the eighteenth. In his Discourse on Method, René Descartes asserted the sovereignty of the mind over the body as a condition of freedom. Freedom, which enables every person to judge what is right or good for them, is based on the act of the mind. The subject's autonomy can therefore be understood as the individual freedom to decide on his or her own preferences through internal deliberation based on a capacity for analysis. It is regulated by a social contract, in the sense given to it by Jean-Jacques Rousseau, in which individuals acquire rights within the framework of the common law, in favour of freedom of thought, belief and choice of destiny.

In the field of healthcare, the application of such an area of patient freedom may have been ignored. For a very long time, medical decisions were taken without the patient's consent, or even without informing him or her. This attitude has been described as 'paternalistic', and since the 1970s there has been a legitimate demand for patients to be involved in the choices that concern them. According to the definition given by the philosopher Tore Nilstun, paternalism consists in treating others in accordance with what you consider to be their good, while rarely subordinating any preferences, expressed or otherwise, to that good. In clinical practice today, the recognition of patient autonomy is reflected in the shared construction of the medical decision. This approach is commonly referred to as the co-decision process. It is based on the recognition of autonomy and is developed through an approach that now requires healthcare providers to inform and take into account the patient's questions, wishes and values. This autonomy must be recognised, but sometimes it cannot be considered an absolute, either because the patient is losing his autonomy and therefore his capacity to analyse and make decisions, or because the demands he may make in the name of his freedom cannot be reconciled with the values or organisation of our healthcare system or our society.

'''Justice'''

The principle of justice is the result of a collective ideal. It can vary from one society to another. In our society and in the context of healthcare, justice is traditionally understood in terms of non-discrimination, universality, access to healthcare for all and solidarity. It is an open, broad and evolving concept. It undeniably has a strong moral dimension based on respect for the individual. But it is also the source of many ethical tensions, because what may be considered just by some may not be considered legitimate by others. It will undoubtedly be the subject of many debates in the years to come: how far will it be fair to limit access to certain expensive treatments? How far will it be fair to respond to all requests for collective solidarity? This concept therefore directly relates to political choices.

The nature of justice is above all a democratic choice. So-called redistributive justice (aimed at distributing wealth) involves arbitrating between what is morally desirable and what is materially possible. It can also raise the question of why some citizens should have more or less than others, and according to what criteria (age, merit, fragility, income, value to society, etc.). This would be the transition from the notion of universality to that of proportionate universalism (offering a benefit, but with modalities or intensity that vary according to need). The notion of justice is therefore closely linked to the issue of combating or reinforcing inequalities. It also involves the question of rights and duties: how do we strike a balance between what everyone is entitled to expect, and what we are entitled to expect from each other?

Behind the concept of justice lies the concept of professional responsibility, in the strictest sense of the term: acting in accordance with the rules established by a society, i.e. the common law, with the corollary obligation to be accountable before the law. All professionals must therefore be familiar with the rule of law and incorporate it into their approach in order to assess whether they are complying with it or, if necessary, to justify the reason(s) for not applying it, or even transgressing it. This is a complex process, which requires the company not to act lightly, and to call on the services of high-level experts, in particular through collegial decision-making, and sometimes even through referral to the courts. This approach is particularly applied to end-of-life decisions, refusal of care, forced hospitalisation in geriatric or psychiatric care, or complex decisions to terminate pregnancies.

<II. In practice'''</u>

The ethics of principles approach must therefore question each of them, in particular beneficence, non-maleficence, respect for autonomy and justice. First of all, this approach in no way precludes the addition of other principles. Furthermore, the idea is not that these four principles should necessarily be respected in a choice or an action, but that they should be systematically questioned in order to see, on the one hand, why and how they cannot all be respected and, on the other hand, how they compensate for each other.

A decision may be acceptable if one of the principles is compromised but offset by the strength of the other three. The most classic example is the loss of autonomy of the subject, where action is nevertheless possible without the person's consent, because the action will be beneficial, not harmful, and judged to be just. Philosophers such as Emmanuel Levinas and Hans Jonas put forward the principle of beneficence and responsibility for others, which underpins the morality of action in relation to the fragility of others. Hans Jonas advocates a principle of responsibility towards the most fragile and action in the name of beneficence alone. This position avoids abandoning those who are losing their autonomy. But this action must be carried out with respect for mutual understanding, dignified support and the constant search, not for consent, but for the other person's as- sence, in other words the building of a path towards a form of adhesion. So, in the principalism approach, we must not conceive of each principle as an absolute, but as a point to be debated, whose possible transgression or adaptation must be ethically validated.