{{knowledge objective
|Identifiant=OIC-009-06-A
|Item_parent=Introduction to medical ethics
|Item_parent_short=Introduction to medical ethics
|Rank=A
|Title=Right and duty to inform
|Description=Acknowledge the duty to inform and the right of patients to be informed about their state of health and all medical acts (medical confidentiality is not enforceable against patients themselves).
|Rubric=Care
|Contributors=Guillaume Grandazzi, Mylène Gouriot, Grégoire Moutel
|Order=6}}


== Informing is a major art'' ==
In practice, this process must be carried out in such a way as to enable the patient to understand it and to ensure that it does not cause anxiety. In clinical practice, we sometimes experience the difficulty of providing information, particularly when faced with highly distressed patients, where the truth is difficult to tell and some patients are unable to bear it. Some former doctors used to quote St Thomas to justify not informing a patient: "Man prefers a lie to the truth. Man prefers a lie to the truth that enlightens". But apart from exceptional cases, this type of approach is a thing of the past. We believe that every patient has the right to know, so that they can participate in the organisation of their care pathway, but also so that they can organise their lives accordingly, in terms of both day-to-day aspects and fundamental choices. Providing information is a complex process but, like any medical skill, it can be learned. This learning process includes both the way in which the information is delivered and the way in which the patient is supported during the process, with a humanistic and psychological approach.

The law gives this development an additional dimension by placing information and consent within a contractual framework designed to assess the quality of medical practice, particularly in the event of conflict. Questions of the quality and completeness of information are part of this framework.

However, a rare case should be mentioned: the wish not to know. This may constitute an exception to the patient's duty to inform if he or she has clearly expressed (data and arguments which must be noted in the medical record) the wish to be kept in the dark about a serious diagnosis or prognosis, or even about any information concerning his or her health and treatment. However, legal and ethical rules specify that this exception does not apply when third parties are exposed to a risk of contamination. This clarification, inspired by the case of AIDS, applies to all serious contagious diseases and is necessary because of the patient's responsibility towards others and in the interests of public health.

== How far to inform: the question of serious or exceptional risks'' ==
Two types of situation may arise in medical practice, depending on whether or not there is a choice between different diagnostic and/or therapeutic hypotheses.

In the (most frequent) case where a treatment recognised and validated by medicine is proposed to the exclusion of all other options, the primary aim of the information provided is not to make a therapeutic choice (unless the patient opts to refuse treatment). The aim is to explain in an "intelligible" way the merits of the proposal put forward, in order to obtain the patient's assent and, where appropriate, any reservations he or she may have, to enable him or her to seek any help he or she may need and to organise his or her life accordingly. This is information of a medical and social nature, prior to acceptance (or refusal) of the proposed treatment, with the aim of health education to improve compliance with prescriptions and optimise the effectiveness of the treatment.

In the case of diagnostic or therapeutic alternatives, on the other hand, information is part of a process of choice where, in theory, after being informed, the patient can opt for one proposal rather than another.

How far should we go in providing information? Should we talk about all the risks, including those of death linked to a treatment or those whose occurrence is exceptional?

The answers lie in the development of the legal rules governing the provision of information to a patient. Several criteria have been established to define the contractual framework between a doctor and his patient:

* the capacity of persons to contract with each other (qualified doctor, registered with the Conseil de l'ordre on the one hand; patient, of legal age, legally capable on the other);
* quality criteria concerning the commitment of the professional (obligation to use reasonable means, respect for professional secrecy, etc.) and of the patient (compliance with prescriptions and monitoring rules);
* a lawful cause for the medical action: a clear and legitimate medical aim justifying the medical action that affects the patient's integrity;
* consent must be obtained after the patient has been provided with quality information, without pressure, i.e. informed and free consent.

In this legal approach, information and consent become one of the criteria for the validity of a contract.

With regard to the characteristics of this information, on 21 December 1961 the Civil Division of the Court of Cassation emphasised that it should be "simple, approximate, intelligible and fair". Since 1995, article 35 of the Code of Medical Ethics has stipulated that:

''" The doctor owes the person he is examining, treating or advising fair, clear and appropriate information'' about his ''condition, the investigations and care he is proposing''. Throughout the course of the illness, he shall take account of the patient's personality in his explanations and ensure that they are understood".

We note that the terms "simple" and "approximate" have disappeared, reflecting a desire to be more rigorous in the approach and rejecting excessive simplicity or approximation. As far as risks are concerned (bearing in mind that all medical procedures and prescriptions, even the most routine, involve them), the information must include them insofar as they are normally foreseeable.

With regard to the concepts of rarity and severity of the risk, in 2000 the Conseil d'État (an administrative court that rules on disputes involving public hospitals) stated that the mere fact that risks occur only exceptionally does not relieve the practitioner of his obligation, and that when a medical act entails a risk of death or invalidity the patient must be informed, even if this is exceptional.

These developments led to the law of 4 March 2002, which stipulates that all frequent or serious risks that are normally foreseeable must be brought to the patient's attention before a procedure is carried out, but also "a posteriori" (i.e. in the short, medium and long term), if new consequences and risks are identified.

''" Everyone has the right to be informed about their state of health. This information concerns the various investigations, treatments or preventive measures proposed, their usefulness, any urgency, their consequences, the frequent or serious risks normally foreseeable which they entail, as well as the other possible solutions and the foreseeable consequences in the event of refusal. When, after the investigations, treatments or preventive actions have been carried out, new risks are identified, the person concerned must be informed, unless it is impossible to trace him or her". Law of 4 March 2002''

== Rules and criteria for assessing the quality of the information provided ==
All healthcare professionals have a duty to provide information within the scope of their competence and in compliance with the professional rules applicable to them. The only exceptions to this duty are in cases of urgency or where it is impossible to provide information. This information is provided during an individual interview, as part of a dialogue. The purpose of the information is twofold:

* respect patients' autonomy of choice by giving them all the information they need to make an informed decision, i.e. to consent to the proposed treatment;

* to provide them with all the information they need to take part in their care and receive all the advice and assistance they need to organise their lives.

This information is provided first and foremost to the patient. If the patient so wishes (i.e. with his or her consent, so as not to breach medical confidentiality without his or her knowledge), it can be given in the presence of a close relative or a trusted person. However, to ensure that the patient remains free to talk about matters that he or she would not wish to discuss in the presence of a third party, it is important to suggest that the interview should initially be an individual one, and that the third party should only be invited secondarily. In the case of minors and patients who are unable to reach the age of majority, information is provided to their parents or legal representatives, but without excluding the patient from access to information. As soon as their age and situation allow, patients must themselves receive information adapted to their degree of maturity. In the case of minors, as far as possible, the information is given to the two holders of parental authority. If only one is present, the healthcare professional will explain the need to inform the other, whether or not the couple are separated. In situations where the prognosis or risk is serious, it is preferable to have an interview with both parents.

On a day-to-day basis, the provision of information must comply with certain rules of good practice: it must be based on complete, validated data that is up to date with advances in medicine and science (in practice, this means that the data must be up to date); it must be understandable to everyone (avoiding medical-technical formulations that are the domain of professional terms and skills); and finally, in terms of content, it must meet five essential points, which must be addressed and discussed with every patient and their representative: the aims of the medical approach, its advantages and disadvantages, its risks, as well as the risks of not implementing it, the constraints generated and the impact on daily life, possible help and support: social rights, help (professional and/or associative) to facilitate the person's progress through the care pathway and their daily life.

== The place of the written word and the issue of traceability of information and consent ==
In practice, as far as the form is concerned, the information must remain above all oral''''''''. It may be aided by the provision of appropriate educational information documents to the patient. Apart from specific cases provided for by law (organ donation from a living person, biomedical research, genetic studies, medically assisted procreation, refusal of care, etc.), the information document is not a document intended to collect signed written consent. Its sole purpose is to provide patients with information that will enable them to come back to it once they have returned to their room or home and to ask any questions they may have.

The information document must meet the same quality criteria as those mentioned above. In addition, it is recommended that information documents should be drawn up by a collegiate body, within learned medical societies or healthcare groups and institutions, tested on patients and validated with user representatives. The advantage of consensual information of this kind is that it produces a benchmark drawn up by experts.

These documents should encourage patients to ask doctors any questions they may have. They can be enhanced with visual aids or linked to websites with animated diagrams or videos. They should be translated or explained in the patient's own language.

Another medico-legal issue concerns the traceability of the information provided, i.e. the elements that make it possible, in the event of a dispute, to prove that the patient has been properly informed. On 25 February 1997, a ruling by the French Supreme Court, known as the "Hédreul ruling" - named after the patient concerned - quashed and annulled the judgement of a Court of Appeal concerning a colonoscopy with removal of a polyp, following which the patient had suffered an intestinal perforation, the risk of which he claimed he had not been informed. Initially, the Court of Appeal dismissed the case, ruling that the patient had to prove that the doctor had not warned him. In its ruling, the Court of Cassation reaffirmed that doctors have a specific obligation to inform their patients; it also stated that it is now up to the doctor to prove that he has fulfilled this obligation (creating what has been called a reversal of the burden of proof, which no longer lies with the patient). Nevertheless, it should be noted that the Court takes into account the reality of the consultation process, specifying that the methods of proof remain unrestricted and that, according to its ruling of 14 October 1997, information may be proven by any means, except in cases where a special legal provision imposes a particular method of proof (such as written consent, for example, in medical research, or for organ removal from living donors).

Since this decision, we have seen the development of brochures or information sheets on examinations and treatments. However, it should be remembered that these documents, although recommended, and even if some have patients sign them, do not free doctors and healthcare structures from other approaches. The quality of the information provided covers other aspects, which will also be taken into account in the event of a dispute. The following will be taken into account: consultation times, information meetings organised by healthcare structures, brochures given to patients, letters exchanged between doctors (in particular with the general practitioner) with copies given to patients, elements of the medical file given to patients.

It is important that all these information sessions are recorded in the medical record (by whom, in whose presence, on what date), together with any difficulties encountered in providing them. It is also important to mention any situations in which it was impossible or complex to obtain information, and to justify this on the basis of the patient's clinical and social situation.

It is therefore important not to forget that a written document does not free the doctor from all the other means of information that he or she may deem necessary, and in particular that the oral time spent with the patient is of major importance.