{{knowledge objective
|Identifiant=OIC-009-21-A
|Item_parent=Introduction to medical ethics
|Item_parent_short=Introduction to medical ethics
|Rank=A
|Title=Biomedical research: protecting and respecting people
|Description=Ethical principles of research: purpose, Nuremberg Code and Declaration of Helsinki, fair information, free and informed consent, independent ethics committee, justice (non-discrimination, fair access to trials). Scientific integrity
|Rubric=Definition
|Contributors=Guillaume Grandazzi, Mylène Gouriot, Grégoire Moutel
|Order=21}}

= Ethical principles of research involving humans (biomedical research) = RIPH (Research Involving Humans)
Research involving the human person (RIPH) is no longer referred to as biomedical research.

RIPH is defined as research organised and carried out on human beings, which goes beyond the act of care and the immediate interest of the patient. It may be aimed at developing biological or medical knowledge, based on procedures that modify the usual, validated treatment.

Its scope covers all tests and experiments on humans, whether they involve new drugs, new surgical techniques, new diagnostic methods that are invasive or carry a potential risk, or psychological or behavioural studies.

A clinical trial is a scientific study carried out in human medical therapeutics to assess the safety and efficacy of a diagnostic method or treatment. It comprises a preclinical phase carried out in vitro and in vivo in animals, and pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic studies in four phases.

= I Principles and objectives of research ethics =


The aim is to apply fundamental ethical principles in the field of research. The principles can be implemented by means of normative texts, such as French laws and/or universal declarations, and by validation of protocols by a body such as the Committee for the Protection of Individuals.

We need to be vigilant about the quality of information and consent prior to any research, but also about the vulnerability of certain populations, safety conditions, monitoring throughout the experiment, after approval of the protocol, and marketing. The creation of patents for the purposes of industrial development must not lead to financial conflicts of interest or inequalities in access to healthcare.

For this reason, the principles that guide ethical research concern the methodology, objectives and conditions of the study, the collection of consent, vigilance towards a vulnerable population, the integrity of the publication of results and clinical management at the end of the study.

These principles are the principle of beneficence, the principle of non-maleficence, the principle of autonomy and the principle of justice.

== A Principle of beneficence
This involves relieving or preventing physical or psychological pain, doing what is best for the patient (including sometimes doing nothing if the anticipated benefit is minimal), and carefully assessing the risk/benefit balance of the treatment envisaged.

== B Principle of non-maleficence
The principle of non-maleficence consists of not causing harm through research, and immediately halting any research that has irreversible or significant harmful effects. In France, the Public Health Code clearly states that "the interests of persons who undergo medical research always take precedence over the sole interests of science and society [...]".

== C Principle of autonomy
The principle of autonomy consists of allowing each person the capacity to think, decide and act freely, according to their own initiative, including decisions concerning their state of health. Subjects should be treated as autonomous persons'','' to protect those whose autonomy is diminished'','' to always seek to respect the wishes of the subject and to guarantee the quality of information and the gathering of consent.

Under French law, the human body is inviolable. It is therefore impossible to carry out treatment (which would be considered an attack on the human body) if the person has not given their consent to the treatment. To give consent, the person must have been informed beforehand. For consent to be valid, it must be free (without any hierarchical, family or other pressure) and informed, meaning that the information must be complete, fair and appropriate. It is also important to ensure that the information has been understood.

== D Principle of justice (or equity) ==
In the face of declining and scarce economic resources, it is necessary to establish priorities in order to preserve equity in access to healthcare. This access must be identical, whatever the country in which the care is provided. Within a given country, health strategies and policies must take account of this principle to determine what will be prioritised: public health or individual health. In research, the selection of subjects must be fair, while protecting vulnerable populations. There should be no exclusion or discrimination on the grounds of the subject's religious, political or ethnic background.

== E Universal nature
Ethical principles are universal in nature and transcend geographical, cultural, economic, legal and political boundaries. Conversely, their application procedure is not universal and depends on the laws or regulations in force in the country concerned. For example, the marketing of patents is prohibited in France but authorised in other countries, resulting in inequalities in access to care linked to these patents.

= II The emergence of research ethics =


Since ancient times, concern and respect for the patient have been at the heart of medical practice, and the Hippocratic oath, still taken today, bears witness to this.

However, society's view of doctors has changed. Until the beginning of the 20th century, the predominant concern was to do what was best for the patient. The doctor, who was the "knower", the "savant", made the decision that he considered best suited to his patient's case. For their part, patients (or their relatives) placed all their trust in the doctor, who appeared to be in the best position to make the therapeutic decision. The principle of beneficence prevailed and medical paternalism was at its height.

At the beginning of the 20th century, attitudes were changing. Technologies were developing in the scientific field. Proof of effectiveness was sought in the medical, police and industrial fields. The principle of beneficence gave way to the principle of autonomy. The collection of consent was seen as legitimising research. By the end of the Second World War, the abuses had become apparent and a regulatory framework was needed. The Nuremberg Code was introduced in 1947.

= III Normative texts =

== A Nuremberg Code (1947) ==
Drafted by non-medical experts following the Nuremberg trials, the Nuremberg Code establishes an international code of ethics for experimentation on human beings. The code respects the principles of beneficence and non-maleficence, in the sense that research must be of benefit to society. The balance of benefits and risks to the subject must be properly assessed. The Code respects the principle of autonomy, and the basic rule is the free and informed consent of the subject, which means that the investigator must provide reliable, clear and complete information before consent is obtained. The subject's freedom is unconditional and inalienable from the beginning to the end of the study, and he or she may withdraw from the study at any time if he or she so wishes.

== B Declaration of Helsinki (1964)
Issued by the World Medical Association, the Declaration of Helsinki takes up the fundamental principles already set out in the Nuremberg Code. It establishes a distinction between clinical and non-clinical research and research for the direct benefit of patients. It states that "the interests of science or society must never take precedence over the well-being of the subject".

== C Manila Declaration (1981)
Issued jointly by the World Health Organisation (WHO) and the Council for International Organisations of Medical Sciences, the Manila Declaration establishes the principle that the opinion of a committee of independent experts must be sought before consent can be obtained from vulnerable persons. This includes children, pregnant women, breast-feeding mothers and protected adults.

== D European Directive of 4 April 2001
This directive incorporates the principles of the Helsinki and Manila declarations with regard to the protection of individuals. It also aims to harmonise European legislation on clinical trials on medicinal products with regard to research into the quality of trials, and to facilitate procedures and exchanges of information in the form of European databases.

== E Revision of the Helsinki Declaration (2014) ==
This is the tenth revision of this declaration. It introduces public consultation as a working method, raises the issue of compensation for vulnerable populations and reiterates the post-study obligation to communicate overall and individual results.