{{knowledge objective
|Identifiant=OIC-009-01-A
|Item_parent=Introduction to medical ethics
|Item_parent_short=Introduction to medical ethics
|Rank=A
|Intitle=Knowing the definition of ethics
|Description=Ethics is a philosophical concept which aims to question and define right conduct. In medicine: the questioning of the principles, values and rules governing the actions of practitioners and researchers, with a view to justifying them.
|Rubric=Definition
|Contributors=Guillaume Grandazzi, Mylène Gouriot, Grégoire Moutel
|Order=1}}<br />

=== Meaning and definition of ethics, as distinct from morality and deontology ===
Ethics is the ability of individuals to reflect critically on the moral dimension of their individual and collective actions and practices. It is a reflexive ability that enables people to question the morality of their actions and the relevance of the values, standards and rules that dictate that they should act in a particular way. It is a skill that makes it possible to question morality, because it is both the place where moral standards are produced and the place where they are questioned. Where morality provides answers and restricts freedom, ethics allows us to question our choices, to arbitrate between contradictory moral obligations. Ethics recognises moral pluralism (of values) but also the need to reach agreement beyond this pluralism, through the use of reason and discussion in a democratic context.

The issues raised in medical practice by developments in science and in our society (patients' rights, access to care, the concept of the family, the use of genetics, gamete and embryo conservation, organ removal, computerisation of medical record data, biomedical research, loss of autonomy, end of life, etc.) require individual and collective reflection to consider the good or bad consequences of decisions and to arbitrate sometimes complex choices in care practices or the organisation of the healthcare system.

Today, every decision involves a multidisciplinary balancing act between medical scientific data, the rights of individuals (personal protection, information, consent), individual desires, collective values and norms and the economic constraints that guide our society.

The ethical approach aims to organise the way in which decisions are taken in each situation, taking into account these different and sometimes contradictory elements. Ethics is therefore not a value judgement (like morality, which prescribes or forbids), or a code of good practice often linked to legal rules (like deontology), but a process of reflection and analysis to help decision-making. These distinctions are important. Morality reflects the state of thinking in a society (or part of a society) at a given time or reflects a dogma. It derives from a set of principles that determine what is good in Aristotle's sense: it is normative, approves or disapproves, rewards or punishes. Deontology brings together, within a code, the rules of good professional practice that mark out the relationship between carer and patient. It defines a framework for professional responsibility and derives from principles derived from the Hippocratic Oath and from legislation governing medical practice. The law, for its part, encompasses all the rules that govern our society, and the obligations and duties of each individual. When applied to the healthcare and public health system, we speak of health law. It stems from numerous legislative texts (law on patients' rights, bioethics laws, laws organising the healthcare system, etc.) and is set out in codes (Public Health Code, Civil Code, Criminal Code). It is designed to manage conflicts and impose penalties and compensation. It is enforced by the courts. Ethics and law are closely intertwined and may evolve over time. Ethics, on the other hand, is an approach. Its aim is to re-examine moral principles and deontological and legal rules, particularly when they do not provide answers in line with the wishes of the people concerned, or when the situation in question cannot be resolved. Ethics is thus the result of active, collective, interactive reflection on human values and on the tensions between wills and other logics. It studies values, tensions, criteria for choice and the various possible scenarios. It works through argument and debate. In medical practice, it is essential because it helps to guide choices towards concrete decisions that primarily concern a single person: the patient.

As a way of questioning how we should act, ethics is above all a multi-disciplinary reflection, in the sense that all the human sciences, law, health sciences and care professionals participate in the construction of the reflection by their varied contributions concerning the individual as well as society and its institutions. This is why ethics is not, in the strict sense of the term, a science. It is not the subject of positive knowledge, nor does it result simply from the study of facts and behaviour. Such a study, while of real interest, is not enough to establish values; describing and explaining what is is not enough to define what should be.

=== Ethics of responsibility and applied ethics ===
In the ethics of responsibility, the idea is to go further by feeling responsible for all the consequences of our actions, with in particular the need for a critical analysis of a rule or a decision if they are not accepted by all or are not suitable for all, "a fortiori" if we know that they may have harmful consequences for the equilibrium of a person or a group of people. In this way, the ethics of responsibility leads to a willingness to act not by making automatic choices, but each time in a singular and reasoned way, in favour of a consequentialist approach.

This means maximising knowledge of the consequences of choices and actions. So, as the objective of responsibility demands, all anticipatory ethics becomes a branch of research with an obligation for collective analysis that should be cultivated by encouraging the cooperation of many experts in the most diverse fields, most often inviting a cross-disciplinary approach. But there is also a need for debate with the people affected, patients and, more broadly, the general public. So any decision involving the future of one or more people, or "a fortiori" everyone, needs to be at the heart of an approach that looks at future consequences, sharing information on benefits, doubts, uncertainties and risks. Any practice that involves risk or uncertainty, or that may call into question a particular human value, must be debated.

This approach is fully applicable to the medical field. Given the many upheavals that medicine has brought about in the course of our lives and in the organisation of society (quality of life, the future of the individual, disability, death, suffering, procreation, screening and prediction, etc.), the question of biopower over individuals has been raised, and today medical risks and practices are under the microscope.

If we want to promote a democratic approach to health issues and encourage people's freedom and responsibility in this area, we need to link medical progress with recognition of social expectations. This link is particularly important when dealing with practices that have a major impact on people's lives, especially if the benefits are debated and/or there are risks involved.

This is why ethics in healthcare is intended to be practical and operational, i.e. ethics that are not just conceptual, but that lead to advice to guide action and choices. This is why we speak of applied ethics.

Applied ethics is based either on descriptive analyses of cases, or on surveys of situations, or on sociological or ethno-medical studies. On the one hand, it proposes the analysis of professional practices, with the aim of addressing the attitudes and behaviour of all those involved when faced with a problematic situation, and on the other, an argument on the consequences of the various possible choices. When it applies to specific cases, it is referred to as 'micro-ethics', and when it concerns societal choices or healthcare policies, it is referred to as 'macro-ethics'. Applied ethics aims to guide decision-making.