{{knowledge objective
|Identifiant=OIC-009-19-B
|Item_parent=Introduction to medical ethics
|Item_parent_short=Introduction to medical ethics
|Rank=B
|Title=Collegial Procedure
|Description=To understand the role and procedures of collegial deliberation in end-of-life situations.
|Rubric=Management
|Contributors=Roberto Poma
|Order=19}}When a person being kept alive artificially or at the end of their life is unable to express themselves, the decision to continue, limit or stop treatment rests with the doctor.

To help the doctor make the best decision for the patient, the law provides for a "collegial procedure", i.e. a series of steps to be taken collectively. The collegial procedure may be requested by the doctor, the medical team, or by the family and close friends on the basis of any advance directives they may have. The final decision rests with the doctor, who must give reasons for the decision and record it in the patient's medical file. The procedure involves consultation between the doctor in charge of the patient and at least one other outside doctor who acts as a consultant. They must be consulted and listened to, even if their requests cannot always be met. The procedure seeks to establish the person's wishes "by examining" the advance directives or, failing that, by the testimony of the trusted support person, or failing that, by that of the family or one of the patient's close friends. The main situations in which the law requires recourse to this procedure prior to any decision are unreasonable obstinacy and deep and continuous sedation until death (DCSD).

Ethical issues. Clinical situations are often complex and uncertain. A poor prognosis or the risk of death should not necessarily lead to the implementation of deep and continuous sedation, even if active treatments are stopped. Preventive" deep and continuous sedation is not a systematic response. It is important to look at other medicinal and non-medicinal alternatives to respond to the suffering of patients by adapting care as closely as possible to their requests and needs.

The CCNE (opinion 139 published on 13 September 2022) emphasises two fundamental principles that must be reconciled: the "duty of solidarity" towards the most vulnerable, and "respect for the autonomy of the individual". Ethical deliberation is about assessing the value of the right to life. If the right to life is given a supreme and indisputable value, any compromise is unthinkable. The debate is closed. If respect for the "right to life" does not amount to a "duty to live" a life deemed unbearable by the person living it, then there is no obligation to live. The debate remains open.

''Good practice''. "The collegial procedure must always consist of a deliberative process and not be reduced to its procedural dimension. In this spirit, each participant in this collegial procedure must be able to argue and then debate within an interdisciplinary consultation, without ranking the arguments according to the role of the professionals present. Each person's position must be able to evolve under the influence of the arguments of others to arrive at a fair and proportionate assessment in the interests of the person being cared for. This process requires a wide range of skills, time and availability. It must be recorded in writing in the patient's medical record" (p. 22).