{{knowledge objective
|Identifiant=OIC-016-05-B
|Item_parent=Organisation of the healthcare system. Regulation. Indicators. Care pathways
|Item_parent_short=Organisation of the care system. Its regulation. Indicators. Care pathways
|Rank=B
|Intitulé=To know the national health insurance fund: Contract of objectives and means with the State (not to confuse the finances of the State with those of the health insurance and more generally of the social security); To know the provisions of the medical convention.
|Description=
|Rubric=Definition
|Contributors=Dr Asma Fares, Pr Cyrille Colin, CHU Lyon
|Order=5}}The French government and the Caisse Nationale de l'Assurance Maladie have signed an agreement on objectives and management for the period 2018-2022, which defines the objectives of the Assurance Maladie, its operating resources and the actions required to achieve them. The agreement is structured around 5 axes:

- '''Improving access to care''' by reducing the number of extra fees charged by doctors in sector 2; helping insured people who have to forego care; introducing a zero-payment system for dental care, glasses and hearing aids; and developing multidisciplinary health centres and the use of telemedicine.

- The transformation of the healthcare system, in particular by developing prevention (smoking, vaccination, organised cancer screening and oral health prevention).

- Improved service to policyholders (shorter turnaround times and more reliable processing of cases).

- The development of digital technology (widespread use of the Shared Medical File, telemedicine, e-prescription and the launch of an e-Vital Card).

- Integration of other schemes (7 million new beneficiaries).

The 3 main resources of social protection are, in order of importance :

1) ''Social contributions'', which are compulsory payments made by self-employed persons, employees and employers to acquire rights to social benefits. These are mainly contributions for sickness-maternity-disability-death insurance, old age insurance, unemployment insurance and family allowances.

2) '''Taxes''' (on salaries, income and wealth, including the CSG) '''and taxes'' (taxes on alcohol, tobacco, car insurance, etc.) '''make up a growing proportion of the resources of social protection'' (and therefore of social security). Taxes on income and wealth account for the lion's share of fiscal resources.

3) ''Public contributions from the State'', which in particular finance solidarity spending (RSA, old age solidarity fund).

The weight of social security contributions is decreasing, while the share of tax resources is increasing. The aim is to ensure that the financing of social protection does not fall solely on earned income. Although the deficit has been gradually reduced since 2011, social protection expenditure still exceeds revenue. The deficit will increase significantly in 2021 and 2022 as a result of the COVID epidemic.

=== Provisions of the medical agreement ===
The agreement defines the relationship between self-employed doctors and the health insurance scheme. It is the result of negotiations between the doctors' unions and the health insurance scheme.

All Medicare beneficiaries are partially reimbursed for the cost of consulting a doctor under this agreement.

Reimbursement rates for consultations vary according to whether the doctor is a general practitioner or a specialist, and according to the type of agreement. Sector 1 doctors are reimbursed according to the rates set out in the agreement with the French National Health Insurance. Sector 2 doctors are free to charge their own fees.

Since 2004, the main role of the general practitioner has been to provide a first level of access to healthcare and to guide patients through the care pathway that he or she coordinates.

All patients over the age of 16 must inform their primary health insurance fund of the name of their chosen preferred doctor (free choice of practitioner, speciality, place and method of practice), with the latter's agreement. Patients remain free not to use their preferred doctor or not to comply with his or her referral prescriptions. However, patients who do not wish to join the scheme will have their out-of-pocket expenses increased (30% reimbursement instead of 70%).
<br />